

ON THE WAY TO YOUR SANTIAGO

ON THE WAY
YOUR SANTIAGO
A trip on foot
Mikel Imaz
















© Mikel Imaz, 2019

ISBN: 9781082388132
PoD Amazon Edition by the author


All rights reserved.







INDEX
Before leaving 9
Basque Way 13
01. Urretxu/Zumarraga — Beasain — Zegama (23.9 km) 15
02. Zegama — Salvatierra-Agurain (21.9 km) 25
03. Salvatierra-Agurain — Vitoria-Gasteiz (27.8 km) 33
04. Vitoria-Gasteiz — La Puebla de Arganzón (18.8 km) 41
05. La Puebla de Arganzón — Haro (30.1 km) 49
06. Haro — Santo Domingo de la Calzada (20.7 km) 57
Plateau 67
07. Santo Domingo de la Calzada — Belorado (22 km) 69
08. Belorado — San Juan de Ortega (23.9 km) 75
09. San Juan de Ortega — Burgos (25.8 km) 81
10. Burgos — Hornillos del Camino (21 km) 89
11. Hornillos del Camino — Castrojeriz (19.9 km) 101
12. Castrojeriz — Frómista (24.7 km) 111
13. Fromista — Carrión de los Condes (18.8 km) 121
14. Carrión — Terradillos de los Templarios (26.3 km) 129
15. Terradillos — Bercianos del Real Camino (23.2 km) 139
16. Bercianos — Mansilla de las Mulas (26.3 km) 147
17. Mansilla de las Mulas — León (18.5 km) 155
Mountains 163
18. León — San Martín del Camino (24.6 km) 165
19. San Martín del Camino — Astorga (23.7 km) 173
20. Astorga — Foncebadón (25.8 km) 181
21. Foncebadón — Ponferrada (26.8 km) 193
22. Ponferrada — Villafranca del Bierzo (24.2 km) 207
23. Villafranca del Bierzo — La Faba (23.1 km) 217
Galicia 225
24. La Faba — Triacastela (25.5 km) 227
25. Triacastela — Sarria (17.8 km) 235
26. Sarria — Portomarín (22.2 km) 243
27. Portomarín — Palas de Rei (24.8 km) 251
28. Palas de Rei — Arzúa (28.5 km) 257
29. Arzúa — O Pedrouzo (19.3 km) 265
30. O Pedrouzo — Santiago de Compostela (19.4 km) 271
Santiago de Compostela 281
Epilogue 285

Before leaving
On weekends I usually meet up with my father. First we had a beer and then a couple of drinks in the bars of the town. That Saturday, the first day of September, I waited for the second zurito to tell him:
—I'm going to do the Camino de Santiago.
"Don't fuck with me," he replied.
The truth is that I didn't see it entirely clear either. But not so much for walking the Camino itself, but for doing something that did not correspond to me at that moment. That's why it had taken me so long to decide.
"Said that way, it seems crazy to me," my father added.
What he didn't know then was that I had been preparing it for quite some time. He had bought me new sneakers and, during the summer, I had gone for daily walks in them. In addition, he had informed me on the Internet about the practical aspects and I had also read a couple of books in which the authors told about his experience. But it wasn't until the last days of August that I went to the Decathlon in San Sebastián to get my backpack and the rest of the equipment, and only then did I make it official: in September I was walking to Santiago.
Those days I slept badly. In the morning I would wake up exhausted and, in the bathroom, with a feeling of unreality, what I was about to do came to mind: embark on a journey of discomfort and leave my wife alone for a whole month. And I also felt guilty for what I wasn't going to do: look for a job and get back to normal.
A few days before leaving, I went to the neighboring town of Beasain to get my pilgrim credential, the document that would identify me as such. They provided it at the pilgrim hostel in this municipality, because the so-called Basque Route of the Interior passes through here, a route that begins in Irún, crosses Guipúzcoa, then Álava, and finally in La Rioja connects with the Camino de Santiago through antonomasia: the French Way.
An idea had occurred to me: taking advantage of the proximity of Beasain, about twelve kilometers away, I would walk to Santiago, leaving directly from the front door of my house. I liked this plan, it would make my trip something special. It even seemed logical to put it that way, although I didn't know of anyone in town who had done the same.
That same afternoon I had received the following WhatsApp from my father:
Listen, thinking and without wanting to get into someone else's shirt, well you will have it well thought out, the first journey, from here to Beasain, I don't know what is so Jacobean. If you want, I could take you by car so you can start from there. Count on me. We'll talk.
I responded the following:
The pilgrimage begins at home, so all the roads to go to Santiago are Jacobean. The difference is that the officers are marked, safe and have shelters. Thanks anyway, we'll be there.
At the shelter I was treated by the volunteer hospital worker on duty that day, a retiree who seemed happy to be able to help me or distract himself for a while, because it was very quiet. After everything he had read, it was the first time he had come into direct contact with the reality of the Camino de Santiago and I felt a little nervous. But the good disposition of the hospitalier encouraged me to ask him the questions he had written down on his cell phone, various questions that had not been clear to me when preparing the trip. Asked:
—Is it advisable to bring a mat just in case?
As soon as he said it, an alarm went off in my head: he had said "just in case." She had escaped me without realizing it. The guides I had read agreed that you should only carry the essentials in your backpack, and that excluded the "just in case," a sneaky expression that betrayed fear. But the man did not take advantage of the ball that had been left within his reach and did not finish on goal. He simply limited himself to giving me his opinion, without paternalism. So, confident, I continued asking: Was the Zegama mountain pass well marked? Were there pillows in the hostels? Did they used to fill up? Should we call to notify them of our arrival?
"Come," he told me a little later, "I'm going to show you the bedroom so you can get an idea."
I accompanied him to a door which he opened asking me for silence. Inside there was a row of unoccupied bunk beds (all with their corresponding pillow), but someone was resting at the back and that's why we didn't go in.
"She's a French pilgrim," the hospitalier whispered to me, carefully closing the door. She is seventy years old and, from what I understand, because she does not speak Spanish, she comes walking from her house.
Returning to reception I noticed that I had calmed down. He gave me the credential, a simple piece of cardboard folded in the shape of a bellows with space for the stamps and which I filled in with my information. He then placed my first seal on it and then accompanied me outside. When I left I was surprised to find myself still in Beasain, it seemed to me that I had been in another world. We say goodbye.
-Good way! —the man wished me, shaking my hand.
And then yes, I felt the emotion that this was serious and I could now consider myself, too, a pilgrim.
Basque Way

01. Urretxu/Zumarraga — Beasain — Zegama (23.9 km)
How to get out of my town was not obvious. I was amazed that it had its complication, this being that of leaving a place on your own, such a basic action. I studied the possibility of going through the mountains, but I ruled it out because it was too complicated and because of the slopes. There was no other option but the shoulder of the road.
In principle I didn't care what day it was, as long as it didn't rain. And seeing that they were good for the weekend, I decided on Sunday because then there would be less traffic on the road. In fact, it was a very good idea to go out on Sunday, because the street would be deserted first thing in the morning and, in case someone saw me, they would think that with my backpack (although large) and my cane I was going on an excursion to the mountains, since That on a holiday was within the norm.
My wife accompanied me on the journey to Beasain, then I would return by train. Once the first dangerous stretch of shoulder was cleared, the rest could be done along bidegorri, the parallel road intended for cyclists and pedestrians who go out for a walk. It was a beautiful summer morning and we were chatting so happily, as if we were taking one of our nice weekend walks. Although there was the backpack, which was pulling on my back with its eight kilos of weight and reminded me at times that this was different.
As we approached Beasain, with a pang in my chest I realized that we would soon have to separate. And that moment came quickly, as soon as we found the first yellow arrow painted on a lamp post. We had to say goodbye.
—You understand that I'm leaving, right? That I can't stay at home and do nothing.
My voice failed me, it broke. It was not the time and, furthermore, everything had already been discussed. But I couldn't think of anything else to say. We hugged and my wife, who also seemed unable to speak, gently pushed me forward with her hand to leave. After a few steps I turned to have my photo taken and forced a smile. Still a few steps ahead I turned again, but she was walking away along the sidewalk and was already lost among the parked cars.
I did the next few kilometers feeling very alone and fighting the urge to cry. He looked for the yellow arrows that marked the path. They were painted on the pavement, the streetlights and the walls. I knew this very well (I was passing in front of a shopping center where we shopped) and yet I had never noticed those signs; He didn't even know, before starting all this, that a Camino de Santiago passed right through there.
The arrows kept me company, nothing more, because I knew perfectly well where I had to continue to reach Zegama. But in a certain place they indicated a detour that I had not considered, it was through an industrial estate that I did not know. I hesitated whether to continue on familiar ground or pay attention to the signs. Finally I followed the arrows and quickly realized that they avoided a road junction and took me along a shorter path.
I had to listen to the arrows, let myself be guided by them. This way I could not worry about planning the best route. I was no longer walking along the dangerous shoulder at the exit of my town, deciding whether to go on my right or left, alert in case a truck passed by me. Now I was within a safe route called "Camino de Santiago", with its infrastructure ready to help me. So, supposedly, my head could stop worrying about some things and try to pay attention to others.
For example to my shadow. To protect myself from the sun I had put on my hat, which, together with the bulk of the backpack and the hiking (or trekking) stick, projected on the ground a silhouette that looked like that of a genuine Jacobean pilgrim, one of those with a cape. and staff. That was me now. I took a photo of my shadow with the intention of posting it later on the Internet, on the blog of the trip that I was going to share with the family.
I felt strange walking with those looks because I didn't see any other pilgrims like me. That sunny Sunday morning I ran into retirees in tracksuits, families with children on bicycles, and middle-aged runners in the bidegorri. I moved forward, leaning heavily on my cane. In reality, I didn't know very well what to do with this accessory and, since I had it, it seemed to me that I had to give it a use or at least pretend to.
My sadness had passed and I was doing well, although I felt tired from the walk. And there was a moment, nearing the end, when I even got scared when I noticed the pressure I was putting on my feet. Suddenly, they felt like they were crushed inside the sneakers. I realized that carrying eight kilos on my back (compared to the sixty-five that I weigh) was no nonsense, not at least after a certain number of steps taken.
Because that was something else: it was the first time I walked so often. My previous preparation during the summer had consisted of daily marches of five kilometers, sometimes ten. And always weightless, I refused to exercise with a backpack full of potatoes. Because in this regard I had decided to believe in something that I had read somewhere and had liked for its elemental simplicity: that true learning and training occurred during the course of the Camino itself. There was no need to obsess.
I arrived in Zegama early in the afternoon. In a park at the entrance, I ate the tortilla sandwich I brought from home. Afterwards I went to the town inn to have my credentials stamped and, along with the paper sheets, they gave me the keys to access the shelter, located in the schools. I thought I was probably alone, but I found the door open and inside I saw a man lying on one of the bunk beds, a guy with combed gray hair and a trimmed beard, who stood up to introduce himself. It was Toni.
"I also thought I would be alone," he told me.
From Irun he had walked with another pilgrim, but that same morning his companion had had to abandon and return home because his feet were busted.
They had improvised the shelter in a gym with very high ceilings. There were a handful of loose bunk beds in the middle of the field, as if playing a game between them. I spread my bag on a bed that was a safe distance from Toni's and went to the shower.
When I returned I noticed that the man wanted to chat. He seemed bored, with nothing to do on a Sunday afternoon in Zegama after having completed his stage practically without breaking a sweat. We exchanged some basic information and I retired to my bunk to write my impressions of the day in my notebook. After a while I heard from his breathing that he had fallen asleep. Later I was also transfixed.
When I woke up he was gone. I went out for a walk and immediately ran into him on the street. We sat on a terrace to have a beer.
Toni liked to chat. He was from Barcelona. He dressed a little like me, from Decathlon, and, perhaps because of that and because of his grace when he moved, he didn't look as old as he was sixty-one years old. He was pre-retired, he said, hence he could dedicate himself to doing the Camino de Santiago throughout the year, he had lost count of the exact number of times he had completed it on his different routes, although the Camino Vasco was the first time going through it.
I remained expectant without giving him further details about myself, although I soon realized that the conversation with Toni was safe because he did not leave the Camino.
—And how about after the first day, does anything hurt? —She asked me.
—What I am is crushed. And it hurts, my shoulder hurts, I don't know if I haven't tightened the backpack straps too much.
"It's normal to feel discomfort during the first few days, until the body gets used to the weight," he said, exercising his shoulders up and down and in a circular motion. Does one shoulder bother you more than the other?
—Yes, it is the law that hurts me.
—Have you carried the cane in your right hand?
Indeed, it was because of that, because of the tension with which he had grabbed it and supported it on the ground. My goodness, how tense he was.
At that time a little dog approached us and was sniffing the corners of the terrace. Toni reached inside his jacket and pulled out a water pistol, which he then used to point the gun at the animal. He stared at him, undaunted. In the end he did not shoot, although he could have done so, since the gun, which was made of transparent plastic, was loaded with water.
"To scare away the dogs, it's the best thing there is," he said in a fake voice, and he began to laugh on his own as he placed the gun on the table.
The little dog went off to his own business without understanding anything, like me. In the literature about the Camino, it was a recurring theme, that of the precautions to be taken by dogs that could bite walkers in the mountains. But I saw this more as a danger from other times, not current ones.
—Besides, if necessary, you have a cane for something, right? —I added.
—The cane is also used to check your step before putting your foot in a muddy mess, which when wearing sneakers is something that is appreciated. What brand are yours?
They were simple, permeable Salomons. Apparently they were good for doing the Camino de Santiago at that time, and I was relieved to hear him say it because I had taken everything quite cheaply from Decathlon and I was afraid that, in front of experienced pilgrims like Toni, it would appear that I had no idea. But he had also been equipped in the same chain and in this regard I was calm.
We continued chatting over a second beer and later had some skewers for dinner. At one point, Toni gave the water gun to a child who was playing there; Apparently, it had been given to him that morning by the colleague she had had to abandon.
We returned to the hostel and I stayed outside to call and chat with my wife for a while. When I finished it wasn't quite dark yet. I looked towards the imposing slope of the Aizkorri massif that rose like a dark cloud above my head. The next day I would ascend the mountainside, although it was not clear to me: if the first stage, very easy, had left me exhausted, how would I fare in the second, much harder one?
The previous week, in order to inspect the terrain and thus calm my anxiety, it had occurred to me to drive there, to Zegama, and take an excursion following that same route. But no, I resisted it just as I resisted the exhaustive training in the previous weeks. Those actions had tempted me as a way to control risk and ensure success in this company. However, with them I risked killing the reason why I set out.
I didn't want to use the trip to feel good about having completed it (another point for my resume), flirtatiously adding that I had left from home and, who knows, maybe managing to finish it in less time than usual. No, for once in my life I wanted to approach it differently, because if not, I knew what would happen: that I wouldn't learn anything really valuable.
I believed I had prepared myself enough so that the journey would not become difficult or risk giving up due to not being in shape or due to lack of foresight. And, from here, I wanted to leave room for uncertainty. Because this time, instead of pulling me, what I wanted was to accompany me and have the opportunity to live with my fears. I was hoping that these would not overwhelm me and that I would be able to be present, because for some reason I had not gone on an adventure, but rather to something much more restrained such as the Camino de Santiago. That was my idea.
Toni had already gone to bed, so I also got into my sleeping bag. It was strange to be there, trying to fall asleep in the middle of a school gym, sharing that space with a stranger. My house was barely twenty kilometers away, but everything had changed. Suddenly, I had lost my comforts and, precisely because of that, I no longer had time to worry about my medium-term future. Now I needed to take care of a more specific tomorrow, to rest, eat, stay and move forward attentive to what was happening to me, one day after another. In the end, the objective was clear: Santiago. And that, despite everything, gave me a feeling of calm, of feeling that, having taken a path, at least I had the next few weeks resolved.



In Beasain, before the yellow arrow (painted on the lamp post) I say goodbye to K. These are my first steps on the Basque Way. The number of times I have passed by here and I have never noticed these discreet signs. From now on they will be my daily bread.



Bidegorri to Zegama and the imposing Aizkorri massif looking at me from up there. It seems that he is laughing at me because of what awaits me tomorrow. I don't have them all with me because I have never walked so much or with such a heavy backpack.
02. Zegama — Salvatierra-Agurain (21.9 km)
I slept badly in the Zegama gym. I wanted to rest well, because the second stage was going to be very hard with the climb to Mount Aizkorri and the passage through the San Adrián tunnel. But the anxiety about the trip that had just begun and the fact that a stranger was sleeping nearby upset me. I regretted taking a nap. Until very late I heard the hour ringing in the bells of two churches, the furthest one was late. At some point I fell asleep, but then I woke up several times during the rest of the night.
Around seven I was woken up by Toni's movements preparing her backpack. I got up and started to gather my things too, taking a while for him to come out first because I preferred to go alone.
"See you later in Salvatierra, I'm going slowly," I told him when I saw him hesitate whether to wait for me or not.
I went to the inn to return the keys to the hostel. I entered the bar saying good morning with an energetic “Egunon!” (which even surprised me because of its sound) and I ordered a coffee with milk. I felt clear and strong, something that had happened to me on other occasions after a bad night before an important event. The adrenaline (or whatever it was) made sure that I felt good in the morning.
When leaving the bar I had to continue down a narrow street where there was a traffic light to regulate the alternate passage of vehicles. He stopped a van loaded with workers who were going to work on a construction site. I remembered it was Monday. The light turned green and I started off too.
Leaving the town behind, the road became a narrow path invaded by nettles (Toni, who was wearing shorts, told me later that he had had a really bad time here). I was going up the course of a river where I surprised a wading bird that took flight as soon as it saw me. Shortly after, as I passed by a farmhouse, a sign said "Beware of the dog," although the animal was asleep and the only thing it did when it sensed me was raise an eyelid.
I undertook the fearsome climb up the mountainside. The steep slope forced me to walk leaning my body forward. It was cloudy and quiet, with no wind. Suddenly, I heard a very loud noise, like that of an avalanche of stones. I stopped scared. Then I remembered that I was right above the tunnels through which the trains on the Madrid-Irún route circulate, which enter and leave the mountain in that area as if they were moles.
A little further on, the trail began to zigzag up the hillside and the slope eased a bit. In some short stretches it even became flat and, in them, a joy came over me that caught me off guard. It seemed to me that it was due to the momentary relaxation of the effort, a kind of message that the body sent to the brain, saying: "This is going well, boy, we are getting there." At one point I looked up and saw the figure of someone who was watching me over some rocks. It must have been Toni, so to avoid catching up with him, I pretended I hadn't seen him and stopped to rest and eat some nuts.
With the altitude, the fog was coming in, but it didn't alarm me because the signage was very good, just as the Beasain hospitalero had assured me. Every time I reached a crossroads, the yellow arrows were waiting for me, on official indicators or painted on rocks or beech trunks. Furthermore, if one accidentally took the wrong path, another yellow sign would immediately appear, this one in the shape of an X or cross, warning of the mistake made. That was magnificent, who could go through life like that.
I was already at a fairly high altitude when a hermitage appeared in the fog. And ahead I heard a cowbell. But until I was in front of them I didn't see the mare and her foal, who trotted towards me. I petted him and looked for my phone in my fanny pack to take a photo. While I was doing it, the foal sniffed my arm and then bit it, but without force, I don't know if it was playing or to find out what my jacket tasted like. He accompanied me for a while and then returned to his mother.
I must have been approaching the San Adrián tunnel. Despite the poor visibility, I recognized the trail from other occasions when I had been there on hikes, as a child or, more recently, with my wife. Those times it had been easier to access that environment, first by car along a track that left you nearby, and then walk a little and visit the grotto. But now the feeling was different because, for the first time, I was going to use the tunnel "for real", since I needed it to get to the other side of the mountain just as it was once used by merchants, travelers and pilgrims who came and went. They came from Castile.
I crossed the natural cave and continued along the remains of the medieval road, paying attention to the ground so as not to trip over the limestone boulders. Then a human being appeared. I felt instinctively close to that young man who was running towards me, because we were in such a lonely place and not having crossed paths with anyone in the last few hours. He was perfectly equipped for a mountain race (trail running), he seemed to be training. But I think he didn't even notice me when he passed by me, so focused was he that he was looking for where to put his foot between the stones. In that spectral fog it was enough to doubt my own existence.
It cleared up and the sun appeared as soon as I began the descent down the other side of the mountain. In the distance, between the tops of the oaks, the ocher tones of the Alava fields could be seen. I felt exultant. And on the way down I noticed more clearly the forcefulness of the weight of the backpack and the oppression on my feet. But, curiously, it no longer seemed so threatening to me because the first obstacle had been overcome and I was not going to have to return home at the first opportunity. It would have been too humiliating. That danger was what had really disturbed me the day and night before. And to rule out any possibility in this regard, I sat on a rock to change my socks. I had to take care of my feet, having them wet from sweat increased the probability of chafing and there was nothing in the world that I wanted to happen to me like Toni's partner, the one with the water gun who had to go home with burst feet.
It was after two when I arrived at the first town, Zalduondo. I sat down in the shade of a chestnut tree next to a fountain with several spouts and took out of my backpack the only thing I had left to eat, some cheese and bread. A young man appeared to fill a bottle of water.
—Are you going to Santiago? —he asked me smiling.
The expression on his face, I recognized immediately, was one of pleasure at having the opportunity to talk to someone who was going on a trip very far from there.
-And where do you come from?
Beasain, I told him, so as not to complicate it. From the other side of the mountain, quite close therefore. And yet, I had the impression that it came from very far away, perhaps because of the drastic change that had occurred in the landscape. When crossing Aizkorri, I had left behind the green and humid Guipúzcoa, and now I found myself among fields more typical of Castilla and the imaginary that I attributed to the Camino de Santiago. I think it was in this brief conversation with the young man that I definitively believed it. By clearing the mountain and abandoning the usual scenario of my life, I felt more confident. He had already started and, yes, I could say it unequivocally: he was directing me to Santiago.
I arrived in Salvatierra around four in the afternoon, along a very little-traveled road, taking care not to lean on my cane, although luckily my shoulder no longer felt sore. At the municipal sports center they stamped my credentials and gave me a key to access the shelter, located this time in a booth that had been the locker room of the adjacent soccer field.
—Spectacular tour, huh? —Toni wanted to share when I appeared through the door.
"Yes, well, I already knew him," I told him, I don't know why, lowering his enthusiasm.
He had been settled in for a while, showered and combed. It seemed like we were going to be alone again, so I chose my bunk in the other room of the two there were. I placed the paper sheets that they had given me on the mattress and pillow, spread out the sleeping bag and began the routine of tasks that from now on I would always repeat upon my arrival at the hostels: shaving, showering, applying cream to my feet, washing clothes and hanging them. Afterwards he was free. In the hall there were a series of lockers inherited from when it functioned as a changing room and, as the rooms were very narrow, I put my backpack and my things in one of them, inserted a coin into the slot and locked it.
—You lock and everything, eh? —Toni told me, with a tone.
He was right, that had been ugly, as if I didn't trust him. But it had come out automatically, I wasn't thinking about what I was doing; and now, the one who felt offended was me, because of the way he had told me. Annoyed, I retrieved the coin, leaving the key in its place, in the open locker. I lay down on the bunk to rest and write in my notebook. Luckily I had my own room.
But a while later two couples of French retirees appeared, all sweaty. Toni, always very attentive to social issues, did not have them under control because, apparently, they also came from Irun but in previous stages they had stayed in hostels. I changed bunk beds to leave them alone in a room while I shared Toni's. When they had settled in, one of the French women, the only one who spoke any English in the group, looked at our door:
—Are you angry? —She asked us smiling: "Are you angry?"
Did we notice that much? And what was that for, and also with that little smile?
-What does it say? —Toni, who didn't know English, asked me, sitting up on his bunk.
I ignored Toni's question because the situation had disturbed me, and I told the woman no, not at all. So, when he offered us, without stopping smiling, some pastries that they had bought in a pastry shop upon arriving in Salvatierra, I realized that, like a good Frenchwoman, I was unable to pronounce the aspirated hache correctly and, instead of "angry", which I had meant to say it was "hungry", "hungry", to see if we were hungry.
"Merci," said Toni, who had quickly gotten up to grab some pasta.
I was left without mine because I had already told him no. She left us alone in the room again, accompanied by an uncomfortable silence that seemed thunderous to me. Toni got ready and went out into the street without telling me anything. Then I also went out, to see if my annoyance would go away.
Among the expectations I had before embarking on the trip was to spend some time in the afternoons doing some sightseeing in the towns, but from the first day I realized that I barely had time left. The only thing I visited in Salvatierra was a Dia supermarket and a bar, both located in front of the hostel. Toni was at the supermarket, like me, buying some pre-cooked food for dinner. At the checkout we waited for each other and when we left we proposed having a drink. Beer reconciled us.
-Know? The French are not the only ones, we took someone else doing the route at our level.
He waited for me to ask, "Oh yeah?"
—Yes, it hit me in the San Adrián tunnel, while I was resting. “He is a man from Madrid who stays in hotels,” he said somewhat contemptuously. When I told him that you were coming behind, he told me that he actually saw you going up.
I remembered the mysterious figure of the guy who was watching me from some rocks while I was climbing. Then I saw it too, I thought, mistakenly believing it was Toni. But between one thing and another, I didn't tell him anything and pretended not to have seen him; just in case, so as not to mess it up, lest, because I hadn't told him right away, he suspected that he was hiding something from him and in some unforeseen way snubbed him again.



Taking a trip on foot is not like going for a walk. I had passed through the San Adrian tunnel before, but I had never had the feeling of authenticity this time. This time it was not a visit. Actually, I needed to use the tunnel to go to the other side of the mountain, reach the Alava plain and continue with my trip.
03. Salvatierra-Agurain — Vitoria-Gasteiz (27.8 km)
I slept well.
"Yes, it's already been noticed," Toni told me when we got up.
Apparently he had snored. It felt bad to bother him, but those were not ways, he could have told me differently. Also, how much had he snored? Much, little? In any case there was no time to dwell on this matter, I had to get going.
It was still night and foggy. The bar across the street was closed and I decided to move on, believing that I would find somewhere else to have breakfast. Guided by the arrows, I passed through an industrial estate with large warehouses and intense traffic, and then I entered the countryside along a dirt and gravel track, leaving the hustle and bustle behind and being left alone with the sound of my footsteps. Toni, whom I had left shortly before having breakfast at the hostel, caught up with me. “See you later,” she told me as she passed me. He was somewhat shorter than me, although much stronger built. He had a purposeful walk and carried the cane in his right hand, without support, like a spear at the ready that he swung back and forth marking the rhythm of his advance, a two, a two. Immediately he was lost in the fog.
With the light of day everything became whiter. The track crossed plowed fields and beyond a few dozen meters nothing could be seen. I stopped for a moment and, as the sound of my footsteps on the gravel ceased, I felt great stillness. With that whiteness, it was as if it were wrapped in cotton batting. A little further on, the road disappeared swallowed by fog and I couldn't see where it was taking me. And yet, that way of heading into the unknown was pleasant.
During the summer, in the weeks before my departure, I had decided to prepare the trip in all its details. I started by analyzing each stage, the interesting places I would pass through. It was important to select the hostels I would stay in, make sure they were good, and that they had good user reviews online. I wanted to keep everything written down. But I got tired and left it until my exhaustive investigation reached León, about two weeks away. So much work without even knowing if I would make it there, it was a bit absurd. And when I abandoned this task, I realized how important it was that the trip was long and therefore expensive to control in advance in all its aspects. It offered me the opportunity to accept a certain amount of uncertainty as part and parcel of it. Somehow, on my way to Vitoria, it was as if the visibility of those dozens of meters that I had before me was as planned. The rest was behind the thick blanket of fog and he would discover it as he advanced.
Because also, I had to look so hard for these first few days and I had not even anticipated that, at this stage, in the small towns that I would pass through, there would not be a single bar where I could have a coffee with milk. In one of them I went into the doorway of his church and, for lack of anything else, I enjoyed a breakfast that consisted of a handful of nuts with bottled water.
I rejoined the path just as the two French retired couples with whom we had shared the hostel passed in front of me. What a rhythm they had! But I was not going to be less, so I quickened my pace to follow them. They seemed to know about trekking, they handled the two poles that each of them carried with good technique. Of course they were not going for a walk, theirs was a full-fledged march. Sometimes two of them stayed side by side, chatting, but as soon as one was left behind for some reason (a hill, for example), the other did not expect it and each one continued at his own pace, and then, perhaps, caught up. the same height again. It was like a cyclist "pulling the rubber" with respect to the one he is pulling, or perhaps less dynamic, like trucks advancing indifferently, each maintaining their speed along the parallel lanes of a highway.
The fog had already cleared and the sky was clear. I was surprised that Toni came after her, apparently an emergency had arisen and he had detoured a kilometer to a slightly larger town, Alegría-Dulantzi, to satisfy her in a bar and drink her coffee on the way. When he caught up with me, he adjusted his speed to mine to tell me that, after passing me early in the morning, he had also passed the man from Madrid, "but don't see what it cost me, I was going like a motorcycle." Since she was keen on him, she said that she was going to try to hunt him down again. I began to tell him about the extraordinary pace of the French retirees, who were still ahead, but just at that moment Toni stopped suddenly to adjust his shoes and I did not wait for him, but kept my pace as I had learned to do, leaving me to myself with the word in my mouth. Then Toni took off and zoomed past us all.
In one of the next towns, the French stopped for lunch and I was finally able to leave them behind. Later, I began to glimpse in the distance the figure of someone walking with two canes. He appeared and disappeared among the undulations of the terrain. He must have been from Madrid. I quickened my pace a little more to get closer, but the distance between us seemed insurmountable. Sometimes I saw it distorted by the refraction of hot air on the overheated earth. In the end I considered it impossible and stopped to rest.
The stage was getting long, I could feel tired. It was noon and the sun was beating down. And my head also hurt: I was missing my daily dose of caffeine. Then, after several kilometers, upon reaching the top of a hill, the skyscrapers of Vitoria appeared in the distance. "Victory!" I sang. I thought that this was a piece of cake, that I would arrive in the city soon. However, as would happen to me on other similar occasions during the trip, I was victim of a psychological effect that occurs when the end of a stage is within sight: the finish line seems close and, therefore, the last kilometers they get longer. With the heat and the desert landscape of the fields, civilization was something like a mirage that was never fully achieved.
I met Toni again, he was sitting in the shade on a bench in the last town that remained just before entering the municipal area of ​​Vitoria. It seemed to me that he was waiting for me. He said that there was no trace of the man from Madrid, as if he had vanished. At that point I wasn't even sure if I had seen it, maybe it had been a vision, because my senses were dull. We started walking together, since I knew the city and it would be easier to get to the hostel. However, Toni continued walking fast, without realizing it he was setting an intense pace for me that I could barely keep up with. But at the same time I also wanted to get there as soon as possible and I was enjoying seeing myself able to keep up with him. When we reached the outlying neighborhoods, the intense pace became devilish, we were almost ready to start running, we crossed the avenues with the pedestrian traffic light on red, until suddenly I noticed a puncture somewhere in my left foot and I I said, "Enough!" What the hell was he doing? I sat on a doorstep and asked Toni to continue without me to the hostel.
—But are you okay?
—Yes, I'm fine, I just need to rest a little and go somewhere to eat something.
—We should give each other the phones, just in case.
I put off, we would see each other later, there was no loss. When I saw that she had left I waited a few more minutes before getting back on my feet. False alarm, everything seemed to be in order. I went into a hypermarket and bought a packaged salad and a bottle of fresh water. I ate sitting in a park, taking my time until I composed myself. Then I continued without haste until I reached the hostel, located in the Old Town.
In the afternoon, after shaving, showering, lotioning my feet, washing clothes and hanging them up, I didn't lie down and rest on the bunk. I put on my walking clothes (pants and t-shirt identical to my work ones) and my sandals, and told Toni that I had met a friend who lived in the city. I went straight to the Artium, to the Museum of Contemporary Art. There, in its cozy modern air-conditioned cafe, I found a table next to a socket to recharge my phone, ordered a latte and a croissant, and took the notebook I had with me out of my bag. I began to write, enjoying the comfortable seat and every sip I took of the coffee. Chill out music was playing. I was glad that I hadn't given Toni my phone number, that I felt there, in those moments, unreachable. I spent a long time, a long hour, lingering, trying to regain my tone, using the notebook as a terminal to communicate with myself again. And I remember that I asked myself the inevitable question that, apparently, every pilgrim asks at one point or another during the trip: Who ordered me to do the Camino de Santiago?



On the way to Vitoria, Toni passes me and then I'm alone. I stopped for a moment and, as the sound of my footsteps on the gravel suddenly ceased, I felt great stillness. It was like being wrapped in cotton batting. Before me, the road disappeared, swallowed by fog, and I couldn't see where it was taking me. But it was nice.

04. Vitoria-Gasteiz — La Puebla de Arganzón (18.8 km)
In Vitoria, the hostel was actually a youth hostel and we had to share a room with some kids who went to bed late after going out in the Old Town. In addition to the noises and snoring, the voices of someone who spoke very loudly in their sleep revealed to me. From a certain hour in the morning, I kept waking up, each time checking the time on my phone. Until finally it was six o'clock, a reasonable time to get up and make some noise while putting things away. When I breathed the tranquility of the street it felt like a release.
Toni stayed at the hostel having breakfast from what she brought in her backpack and it wasn't difficult for me to find an open cafeteria where I could refresh myself. I ate a tortilla skewer accompanied by a coffee with milk while from my table I watched the city wake up through the window. I felt like a weirdo with my globe-trotting appearance, especially when two executives in suits and ties walked in and drank black coffee at the bar. When I left the premises an hour later, I was faced with the hustle and bustle, people rushing to their jobs and children rushing to school on their first days of school. Along avenues with a wide pedestrian promenade in the middle, I looked for the tiles with a scallop engraving that marked the exit from Vitoria. I was sure that only I saw them. He was moving against the current, since the majority was heading towards the center. Perhaps because they were sleepy, no one seemed to notice me, as if I were in one of those agitated dreams with many people to whom I was invisible. But I told myself that, like them, I also undertook a job, a task that in my case simply consisted of walking.
In a residential area on the outskirts, a small monolith indicated that it was 630 kilometers to Santiago. Almost nothing. At the moment of taking the photo, I happened to capture in the image two girls who had gone out for a run in the morning, and I felt like them, with the motivation that returning from vacation provides (at least during the first days) embark on a new purpose in life.
The stage was short compared to the previous day and I decided to go alone, without falling into the trap of following the pace of others. And since I didn't meet anyone, neither with Toni, nor with the French, nor with the man from Madrid, I calmly went along paths that ran between mown fields and scrubland. Climbing a hill along a path, I surprised a bird of prey a few meters from me that took flight when it saw me and began to glide over the valley. And a little further on, a roe deer that was in the middle of the field hurriedly jumped and took refuge in a grove of trees. In the three small towns (or rather hamlets) I passed through, I didn't see anyone either.
In the online guide to the Camino de Santiago that I consulted on my mobile (www.gronze.com), I read that in La Puebla de Arganzón, to access the hostel, you had to ask for Mr. Vicente (thus, without a last name) at the bar Ansotegui. Right there I met up with Toni, he had arrived a while earlier and they had told him to wait a little, that Vicente was not there at that moment but that he would be back soon. We ordered a zurito.
"One more stage," Toni said, clinking our glasses together.
I drank it in one gulp. The beer was so good that I took a photo of the nondescript glass that I returned to the bar.
Mr. Vicente, a chubby, smiling man who seemed to be returning from the garden, asked us to accompany him. It was not easy to understand him because, in addition to wheezing, he slurred when speaking and did not enunciate clearly. He led us to what must have once been the teacher's house: a simple town house next to the school, with small rooms full of beds. Vicente explained everything about the facilities to us and finally told us where the donation box was.
"Yes, don't worry, Vicente," Toni told him to make him see that with people like us there was no need to remember, because we were real, trustworthy pilgrims.
Wow, how dangerous it was to leave it in the hands of each person's conscience. It was the first "donation" hostel I stayed in, in the previous ones the modest price of a few euros was set and paid in advance.
I shaved, showered, creamed my feet, washed my clothes and hung them up, and after eating a packaged pasta salad that I had bought the day before in Vitoria and resting a little in bed, in the afternoon I I started writing in my notebook on the table in the kitchen.
—But what are you writing, man, your memoirs? —Toni let go of me as soon as he appeared there after having had a little sleep with him.
He also kept a small Moleskine-type diary in which he used to telegraphically record the data of the stage and how he had done during it. The thing was that Toni would air it out in a few minutes as just another task ("my homework," he called it), while he watched me pass the time completing several pages of my spiral notebook.
"I'm writing down my impressions," I told him dryly, a little annoyed at having made me lose the plot.
But he didn't seem to understand, because he sat down in one of the chairs in front of me and continued talking to me. Furthermore, soon the French retirees accompanied by Vicente appeared. It was clear that he wasn't going to be able to concentrate, so I closed the notebook and suggested to Toni that we go to the grocery store to do the shopping.
The Ansotegui was a bar and also a grocery store, with different spaces but attended by the same staff. While we were getting things for dinner and for the next day's trip, we saw that Vicente returned to this "his office", the place where he supposedly spent his idle hours. When we left with our bags we found him sitting on the bench against the wall of the bar, with one arm resting on a barrel and the other on the backrest. He started talking to us and we approached him. He wanted to chat a little with us, it was obvious that he liked dealing with the pilgrims, perhaps more than with his neighbors.
Toni and I had some zuritos, he didn't want us to invite him to anything. He told us that many people had passed through there doing the Camino de Santiago.
—And you've never done it, Vicente?
He smiled and, touching his bulging belly with both hands, he said something like: "But do you see me doing it with this look?" No, he had never left the town and at sixty years old he was not going to do so now. But he had met a lot of people, a lot of foreigners, he had talked to more foreigners than anyone else in town: French, German, Chinese, everything.
—Even two Moors once passed by here.
—But that can't be true, Vicente.
And hit on "Vicente", time and time again we added his name as a tagline, how easy it is to fall into condescension when the opportunity presents itself.
"It can't be that they were Moors, remember about Santiago Matamoros," I told him, acting smart.
—Yes, I'm telling you.
We had an early dinner at the hostel, the meal times had become distinctly European to us. Then we went for a walk. It was getting dark after such a good day and the terraces of the square were full of people. We went once again to Ansotegui and Vicente was still there, although he was already going home, as if he had finished his day. However, we still spent a few minutes with him while we had the first zurito of the night. From the looks they gave us, he noticed that we attracted the attention of the customers.
—What, what an ember you've gotten into, eh? —said a guy with a cloudy look who turned to us from the bar when Vicente left—. Have you already found out something? Because look, this one can't be understood at all.
With a shiny earring in his ear and drunken eyes on his face, he was having a drink, a cola cocktail. We said yes, turning our backs on him. However, the man did not want to let us go, he asked us where we were from. I started to get on guard as we ignored him. He raised his voice to us:
—Damn, what's happening? Do you pay attention to that one and not me?
My heart began to pound as I watched Toni turn to face him.
"Let's see, what do you want," he said defiantly.
But everything came to nothing because a friend of his appeared on the scene and, with a smile that meant "don't pay any attention to him," grabbed the thug and turned him back towards the counter. I would have wanted to leave there, but Toni ordered another round.
"Give us two more zuritos, come on," he told the waitress with a tone of voice deeper than his normal one.
The girl smiled at us as she served us the zuritos and I thought that after what happened, she would have asked for some beers. I liked the firmness that Toni had shown. If necessary, he would surely have defended Vicente as one of our own, there was a kind of spirit of unity between us, a “To me the Camino!”
At the end of the round we left the bar to retire to the hostel. We were leaving behind the tables on the terrace that were still full when I heard someone shout to us and signal to us from the other side of the square, so that we should wait for him. He was a tall man, with a bushy mustache and rimless glasses, who walked like he was stepping on eggs. It didn't sound like anything to me. I noticed his leather strap sandals, his feet were very airy.
"I'm staying here," he said, pointing with his hand to the Arganzón Plaza hotel, whose manor house façade was illuminated by spotlights.
I understood that it was the man from Madrid, I was finally going to meet him. He was dressed casually, but not in the current sporty way, since he was wearing a shirt and long khaki pants, with many side pockets, an adventure-like outfit that was reminiscent of Miguel de la Quadra-Salcedo, of whom he had an air not only because his mustache, but also for his clear diction and polite treatment.
His name was Julio and he was “going to a hotel”, but he really wanted to share a few minutes of chat with pilgrims like us. I imagined him at the end of the stage, filling the bathtub in his room at the Arganzón Plaza with hot water and then having an a la carte dinner at his restaurant. But he needed to comment on how he was doing and know about those walking the same route as him. The three of us stood talking for a long time, as if isolated in a bubble in the middle of the square. Like Toni, Julio was an experienced walker, although on this trip his feet were destroyed. He said that he had made a mistake with the footwear: instead of new and somewhat worn-out sneakers, he had brought very comfortable ones that he was fond of but that were worn out. In any case, he had come to travel only the Basque Way and only had two stages left, so he was going to finish it no matter what.
"But you won't be that bad, on the way to Vitoria I thought I saw that you were going like a locomotive," I told him.
—Yes, it's true, I was excited seeing that I could keep up the pace, but today I paid for it.
He admitted that he was hooked on the endorphins that the body produces when adapting to continuous intense effort. He said that a book he had read in French a few years ago explained it very well. It sounded like a lot to me.
—Couldn't it be The Immortal Path by chance? —I asked him, it was one of the two books that I had read that summer in preparation for the trip.
"Indeed, Immortelle randonnée," he said in perfect French, "I didn't know it had been translated."
Its author was called Jean Christophe Rufin, an upper-class diplomat and renowned French writer. I had read it with interest, although his gaze seemed a little elevated to me; Like Julio, he also didn't want to know anything about sleeping in pilgrim hostels. I wondered if they knew each other.
We continued standing, but I didn't get tired, I felt enchanted by the conversation we had with this Julio, who had the gift of conversation and liked to savor the experiences, those he told and those he listened to others. We agreed to have a wine together the next day in Haro. And when we said goodbye I realized that we hadn't even agreed on where or at what time.
05. La Puebla de Arganzón — Haro (30.1 km)
They had told us that at the exit of La Puebla there was a bakery-cafeteria that opened at seven in the morning. And I showed up there minutes before that time, after having slept well, ready to help them raise the metal blind if necessary. I wanted to have breakfast and get going as soon as possible, because the stage was long and hard, according to the guide. Already sitting at a table with my coffee with milk and toast, I watched the news on TV. In four days of travel I had completely lost track of current events and what they were saying was foreign to me.
Then Toni came in and ordered an American coffee and a Neapolitan.
—But you hadn't already had breakfast at the hostel? -asked.
He smiled with a shrug. As he confessed to me later, he was one of those who came home with a few extra kilos on these trips (something that, on the other hand, was not going to happen to me, that's for sure).
We set out together but separately. I warned him: "Each to his own, you're messing me up." In any case, it was a stage in which we had each other within sight for a good part of the route. Toni seemed to be calmer and, in fact, at one point I left him behind in an almond orchard, picking almonds and cracking them with stones. Later he passed me by when I had to go to the side to put a band-aid on because of a chafing (first incident on my feet).
We passed through several of those towns in whose squares a few old men with staffs gather, sitting in the sun. Accessing a town like this, on foot from the countryside or coming down from the mountains, gave me a feeling like a traveler from another time. Among the houses in the urban area, my cane (which I was already learning to support without straining my arm) sounded different against the pavement, with some echo in the first deserted streets. Then I tried to push it so that the rubber tip bounced against the ground, thus producing more noise with which to highlight my step. I felt special saying good morning to the locals, as if what I was doing was "serious", not a simple excursion. Some identified us as pilgrims and wished us "buen Camino", like a cyclist who saw me from the road and, raising his arm high, shouted to me: "Buen Camino, pilgrim!" It was not unusual for a car to honk at you as it passed. In these effusive greetings I imagined that the simple fact of seeing me had instantly brought back to some people the memory of their own experience of the Camino de Santiago and that it must have been good.
In the town of Salinillas de Buradón, Toni and I finally arrived at the same time and, as there was a bar, we decided to have a drink before the climb to the fearsome Portillo de la Lobera. He was thirsty and ordered a large beer (a "cañon"), while Toni struggled unspeakably not to order the same accompanied by one of the pinchos that were making eyes at him from the counter. He managed to overcome the temptation and came to the table with only an Americano coffee. We did share, of course, some nuts that I had in my backpack.
When we started again we found Julio, the man from Madrid, who had just arrived and was resting on one of the benches at the exit of the town. He wore a khaki peaked cap, with a hanging back brim to protect the back of his neck from the sun, which only accentuated the explorer aspect of him. He had left his canes leaning against the trunk of the plane tree that gave us shade, and Toni noticed that they were the most expensive among those sold at Decathlon. Then he placed his next to it, which was mid-priced, and he asked me to do the same with mine, since it was the cheapest. "The full range," he exclaimed while taking a photo of the set. That touched Toni something, perhaps also because Julio told us that in Haro he was staying at the Los Agustinos hotel (a four-star hotel). The fact is that when we said goodbye and with the first slopes, he told me: "This guy has to pay me for a wine today."
I started to pull very hard, so much so that Toni was left unhooked. I came up high, I felt euphoric and strong, I don't know if the beer I had just drank had anything to do with it. I also remember the suffocating heat it was and the annoyance of the cloud of mosquitoes that formed in front of my face, around the shade provided by my hat or searching for my sweat. It was impossible to get rid of them, I waved my hand but they came back instantly and I felt like a relentlessly harassed cow. It was so annoying that maybe that's the only reason I went up so fast.
From the hill there was a splendid view over the vineyards of the Rioja Alta. The descent was also steep, with the path covered in stones. I was focused, looking at the ground so as not to trip. Then Toni overtook me at full speed, since he did this type of descents running. He said that by taking less time he didn't put as much pressure on his knees, something that I didn't fully understand because, due to the speed, the pressure on them must have been greater. But in addition, according to him, there was the risk, the challenge, the fun. This he understood better. By the time I reached the bottom, at the height of the first vines loaded with Tempranillo, I was already walking with Toni at full speed.
Shortly after, the exit from Briñas along the road next to the Ebro River suddenly became familiar to me. But I had never been there! Then a sequence from the movie The Way, starring Martin Sheen, came to mind, and it seemed to me that we were passing through the same place where it had been filmed. It was amazing that my senses had warned me of this while I was attending to Toni, who couldn't stop talking (she complained that in recent years the spirit of the Camino was being lost). I would have liked to stop and confirm with my cell phone that those scenes from the movie had indeed been filmed there. Furthermore, I would have liked to contemplate the Ebro, but it was as if I, too, were being carried away by a current.
Faced with my inability to put the brakes on the race, I noticed how irritation surfaced within me. "The spirit of the Camino was being lost": ha! What a commonplace that was for an expert on the subject like Toni supposedly was. And while he was carrying me (or was I the one carrying him?) along the banks of the Ebro, I remember thinking that he was not exactly the bearer of that "spirit" he was talking about, since he was continually making "Paths." I saw Santiago as a sport or entertainment rather than an authentic, once-in-a-lifetime pilgrimage, just as I envisioned it.
I arrived in Haro exhausted, I was walking dazedly through its streets, with my senses dulled and lazy, I was in danger of tripping over a curb and falling flat. When we finally arrived in front of an old chalet that was the hostel, we called the telephone number indicated so that someone would come and open the door for us and we lay down on the ground to wait, without paying attention to whether the sidewalk was clean or not.
A volunteer from the local association appeared, a man of retired age. He stamped our credentials and took our information before leaving us the keys. Then, wanting to know something about us, he asked us about our experience. When I told him it was "my first time," he replied:
—Well, it won't be the last, friend. The Camino is engaging.
I was so faint that I lay down on the bunk without showering or anything and I was frozen. In the restless dream that followed I kept hearing "the Camino hooks, the Camino hooks", while I ran to avoid being hooked by someone who in my nightmare was a confusing mix between Toni and the pensioner from the association.
Despite everything, I recovered quite well during the afternoon and, after a nap, shaving, shower, foot cream, washing clothes and hanging them, shopping at a nearby supermarket and having an early dinner, we Toni and I went to La Herradura, which is what the bar area of ​​Haro is called. We went around the circuit a few times (like a roulette wheel) and, at the end, we entered a bar with very high ceilings called Los Caños.
And there was Julio, sitting at a table with a skewer and a glass of wine. Chance? The most striking thing was that neither Toni nor I remembered that we had talked about seeing each other again. But that was magnificent, of such freshness and naturalness that I was even tempted to attribute it in a mystical way to the powers of the Way.
We sat down with him and ordered a couple of reds. Like the night before, the conversation began to revolve around the stories experienced by those two characters on the Camino de Santiago. Toni said that two years before he had done it by bicycle, on a tandem, he pedaled guiding a young blind man from Barcelona, ​​along the Catalan Way first, then the Ebro Way and then the French Way, until he reached Santiago. As he explained the details of his experience with the blind boy, I realized that perhaps I was wrong about him, and, at least in thought, I took my hat off.
I felt part of that pleasant talk because I was allowed to intervene despite my lack of experience. It turns out that both had also traveled abroad (Toni through Latin America, Julio around the globe) and, while they talked, I felt immersed in a parallel world, oblivious to the neighboring tables and the reality of the environment. It's been a long time since I felt so good being part of a group of people.
—And with all these travel experiences you have, haven't you considered writing something? —I asked.
Actually my question was directed at Julio, who, with the curiosity he showed about everything, seemed to me like he had to be someone who wrote.
"I've thought about it many times, but I wouldn't know how to do it," Toni answered.
I told him that simply telling it, just as he was doing it at that table, would be good material, then he would find someone to help him shape it. For example, that trip from Barcelona to Santiago that he had made in tandem with the blind boy, he had talked about the problems they had encountered, the tensions that arose between them despite the camaraderie, the good and bad moments. What is it like to act as a guide on the Camino? Being at the same time the eyes of another, did he perceive differently the places that he already knew before? What was it like arriving in Santiago after such a long and intense trip? Your direct experience, I would love to read that story, I told him.
"You're right, I should do like you," Toni told me when I finished my speech, which had been (I realized now) perhaps too eloquent. And then, addressing Julio—: don't see how many pages this one fills in his diary...
"Hey," Julio then told me, "forgive me for asking you, but what's your last name?" It is to identify you when you publish your book.
—Ha ha, very good.
That broke the rules of the game. It crossed my mind to propose a deal: I would tell him my last name if he told me his in exchange. Because, let's see: who were they? To Toni, early retired in perfect physical shape, due to his courage and discipline (except in matters of eating and drinking), in my imagination I had assigned a military past, perhaps not very satisfactory because this would explain, considering his loquacity, that he had not yet knew nothing about his life. Julio, because of how well he spoke and his exquisite education, could be a magistrate or perhaps a diplomat, since he was well traveled and knew languages. Would Julio be a public figure? I was greatly intrigued by this possibility. I was very attentive to the clues he gave because later, when I arrived at the hostel, the first thing I would do was look it up on the internet. But no luck, I never found out: without knowing the last name it was difficult to find it in a Google image search. Maybe he wasn't famous after all.
We left the bar telling each other that we would see each other. But the truth is that when you do the Camino de Santiago you never know if you will see the person with whom you just shared a good talk again. And we never saw Julio again, although at least Toni was reassured: he paid for the wines for us.

06. Haro — Santo Domingo de la Calzada (20.7 km)
We slept freely in the Haro hostel, each in a room and the whole house to ourselves because the French did not appear. But the tranquility was going to end that same day, as soon as we arrived in Santo Domingo de la Calzada and joined the crowded Camino Francés. Due to the uncertainty of what we were going to find, we started very early, to arrive as soon as possible even though the stage was short and practically flat, a walk compared to the previous day.
Dawn caught us advancing along a path between vineyards, under a very wide sky with scattered clouds illuminated by the first rays of the sun. At some distance we saw some giant vehicles moving between the vines, they gave the impression of being alien insects fallen from the sky that were eating the harvest (when we reached the height of the grape harvesters I wanted to check that, indeed, someone was driving them inside). I immediately saw a bell tower in the distance and, inspired by how easy the stage was going to be, I naively believed that this must already be Santo Domingo. In reality it was Zarratón, a town halfway along where Toni and I stopped to have our first coffee of the day.
On the way out, I don't know why, I started shooting like a condemned man, with Toni in tow. In the middle of the field, as I passed by a hamlet called Madrid de los Trillos, some dogs started barking at me. There were two of them and they were tied, but suddenly a third appeared loose, black, not very big, and came running towards me. Instinctively I planted the staff in front of him as if I were brandishing a sword. The animal stopped a couple of meters away, barking at me and showing its teeth. I was very alert, but, something extraordinary for me, the situation did not get out of hand and I did not allow myself to be carried away by fear.
I knew that Toni was coming behind, she was probably watching me at that moment. Furthermore, the dog could not be dangerous if its owners left it free in the middle of the Camino de Santiago (although anyone knows). And then there was the determining factor, something that was becoming increasingly important to me and that I think was decisive for me to stay still: the photo could be good, as well as the story, to share later on the blog. Getting it required not fleeing the scene.
It happened very quickly, all of these were considerations that I made almost unconsciously, with the dog barking at me and me taking out my cell phone with my free hand, the one that was not holding the cane. I took several images, I wanted to get one in which the dog was looking at me fiercely and its teeth could be seen. But he didn't stop moving and couldn't really get a good shot. And that's when I realized the dog wasn't focused on me. In fact, it seemed to me that he was boring him and his thing was more of a reflex than anything else. I removed the cane and he immediately fell silent, and with him the other dogs. Then I started walking again.
When I had gone a few meters, the barking behind me resumed and I turned to see how Toni was managing. Lacking a gun, he squeezed his water bottle with a spout so that a little stream came out (“shut up now, chucho”). According to him, this left them bewildered, although the dogs did not stop barking as they passed.
Approaching Santo Domingo, we began to see from a distance the trail of hikers with backpacks that were currently arriving at the town following the French Way. "Wow!" I said to myself, standing up. I found that impressive because after a week in which I had only seen six pilgrims, in one fell swoop I was seeing something like ten times as many.
"The peace is over," Toni said when she caught up with me, looking at them in turn.
I also understood it that way, that a part of the trip was ending that was not going to be anything like what awaited me from then on.
Seeing all those people, we suddenly became afraid of running out of room in the hostel where we were thinking of staying. And we knew that the one belonging to the Brotherhood of the Saint was one of the largest with its more than two hundred seats. But even so we got nervous and accelerated to arrive as soon as possible.
In the hallway of the hostel we found a line of pilgrims queuing to register. A man instructed the new arrivals, in Spanish and English, to leave their shoes and canes in the room next to the entrance, since they were not allowed to enter the facilities with them. Mesh shoe racks completely covered the walls of that room, with a good hundred pairs of boots and slippers by the time I left mine. In flip-flops, feeling a little naked, I got in line with Toni, behind two girls who said they were Australian, hoping that my things would be safe there.
We were assigned our bunk beds in a dormitory for twenty people, men and women, in which it was difficult to move without tripping over a backpack. There were people there from all over the world, but I kept seeing Asians, perhaps because they caught my attention more. As I spread out my bag, I noticed a rather older Mexican pilgrim, perhaps in his seventies. He was sitting on his bed with a lost look, he looked tired. He had just heard him talking on his cell phone with what was surely his wife. "Yes, I arrived right now, yes, the stage was shorter today," he had heard him say at a very high volume, as if to counteract the great distance that separated them. Apparently, the woman had been scared because he had called her before the usual time. “Yes, I'm fine, don't worry,” the man reassured her again and again. And then he said: "I love you very much"; and he repeated it again before saying goodbye to her with a trembling voice. He then stared into thought, sitting on the bed, doing nothing.
I felt down. Some Asians had lain down on the bunks to rest in their sleeping bags, as if they were sick, and for a moment I had the feeling that we had been forcibly confined, that we were confined in some kind of concentration camp or of refugees, far from our families. I missed my wife and wanted to be with her back home. But the despondency didn't last long because I had to shave, shower, cream my feet, wash her clothes and hang them up. And every day you had to pay attention when carrying out these basic tasks because the shelter was always new and you had to position yourself and adapt to its particularities. When I returned from the services, I noticed that the Mexican had also started because the transport company had just brought him his backpack. So that was it: what I had attributed to this man's fainting of melancholy, perhaps had been nothing more than a wait, not being able to do much until his luggage arrived.
After going to buy dinner at a supermarket, we looked for a bar where we could have a quiet beer. Toni was very happy when he saw that they had bottles of Estrella Damm, her favorite, which she liked to drink straight away. I ordered a zurito. The waitress missed the mark a bit and, in terms of quantity, what she served me was the same as Toni's fifth. Not so in terms of price: one twenty against one eighty.
—The bottle is a little expensive, right? —Toni protested to the girl.
—How expensive? "It's the price here," she replied hurt. Because of her accent she seemed Romanian.
By "here" I understood that he was referring to the town, which was common to charge there for those drinks. Those prices seemed normal to me, but Toni did not get off the donkey and, sternly, reproached the Romanian woman for taking advantage of pilgrims like us who were passing through. The young woman was not one to remain silent, but that did not prevent her face from reflecting her discomfort at the unfair treatment she received from a client. I felt very sorry for her, I'm sure she had enough moving forward without being treated like that on top of her.
When we went out to the terrace with our drinks I was about to tell Toni that she hadn't been right. But I didn't dare. And I don't remember exactly why he started talking to me about his life, I certainly didn't ask him. It was enough for me to attribute a dark military past to him and for us to continue sharing beers, now that, in addition, we were surrounded by a multitude of pilgrims to gossip about. But the fact is that he told me in passing who he was: divorced, father of a son; For much of his professional life he had been a salesman in electrical equipment, until he got tired and set up a distribution business for the same material on his behalf, which failed, and then another with a partner who also went bankrupt due to crisis. After that he had decided to dedicate himself to traveling, living from sporadic jobs (he did not say what) and with the small subsidy that he received as an unemployed person who was over fifty-five years old. I remembered that, when I met him in Zegama, he had introduced himself as "early retired", without specifying more, and now he understood that this allowed him to adopt an identity that was within the normal range, given his age.
I felt compelled to reciprocate by telling him something about myself. If we had stuck together this far, it was a sign that there might be some trust between us. Furthermore, it seemed clear that we were going to continue seeing each other at least until León. (In León, Toni planned to deviate from the French Way by following a different route to Santiago). So I told him that he had a wife (I already knew that). That during my life I had basically worked as a programmer of industrial automatons, but that I had always had a very bad time in the world of work and that, in order to grow and try to gain some confidence in myself, I had taken a hopeful and at the same time professional leap. desperate, as a solution salesman and leading projects. And that this jump, reaching forty, turned out to be fatal because after that there was nothing. But the consequences had not been all bad, since the last few years, in which I had been without working, had allowed me to understand that during my life I had followed like an automaton a stressed way of living that responded to a written program. for God knows who.
That's it, it was already said.
—Well, at least now you'll be calmer, right? —She asked me.
"What's up, I'm the same," I replied. But it's funny, he wouldn't go crazy back to what he was before. So I guess yes, I'm better.
The two Australians who had preceded us to the entrance to the hostel passed near the terrace where we were, and then two other pilgrims who were wearing tight tights and according to Toni were also staying there. I didn't miss a detail either, why deny it. The street was full of pilgrims and we started talking about the people. It was nicer that way. Later I realized that I was dealing with someone who spent a good part of the year outside his house, walking "Roads." Toni must not have felt very calm either, as an early retiree.
That night I had a pre-cooked potato omelette for dinner, accompanied by white rice and a salad. We had a hard time heating the food because the hostel kitchen was taken over by Koreans (the Asians were almost all Koreans) and we had to wait for the microwave to be released. The truth is that the dining room and common area of ​​the hostel were very lively. There were groups of pilgrims who were happily emptying bottles of Rioja. And also many people alone, who did not seem out of place at all, looking at their cell phones, reading or even writing in their diaries. I remembered the book The Immortal Path, in it, its author says that he did not take any notes during the trip because he trusted his memory, which acted as a filter for what was truly relevant to him when he began to write about the experience afterwards. And he added that it even "irritated him to see some pilgrims, in the stages, spoiling precious moments of contemplation to scribble in notebooks." Maybe he was right, but I needed to write, so after dinner I went to get my notebook and began to "scribble" at a long table, accompanied by others who were also doing it. It was not only a matter of writing down the data of what had happened to me during the day, I also needed to finish the conversation that I had had with Toni about our lives and that had been interrupted. Yes, it was true, now I felt just as stressed as before. But he was better, because that was precisely what he had learned, that it remained the same. That the ups and downs were essentially inevitable and my power over them limited. The hopeful illusion was no longer possible and life had become, perhaps, more crude. Also more authentic. I lacked the protection of a normal life, but in exchange I had me. I wanted to continue. From the next day, until Santiago, it was all towards the west.



This dog came out barking and I stopped his feet with the cane. I took photos of him while he was hanging there. I haven't gotten a picture in which the dog looked at me while he showed his teeth at me. But in the meantime I realized that his barking was more of a joke than anything else.



The hostel's shoe rack is spectacular. I count the pairs to know how many there are. The color of the shoes is lost because the dust from the road makes them all even. I have been reluctant to leave my sneakers there, what if they are stolen? You had to enter the shelter barefoot and that made me feel naked, as if the weapon with which I protect myself had been confiscated.
Plateau

07. Santo Domingo de la Calzada — Belorado (22 km)
I spent a restless night in the common room. It was difficult for me to fall asleep because among so many people I kept hearing noises of changes in posture, heavy breathing and snoring. Plus, my bunk bed was right next to the door, and because the hinges squeaked, I woke up every time someone left to go to the bathroom. At five o'clock I woke up to the hustle and bustle of the Koreans, the first to leave. I also heard the crow of a rooster and remembered that the cathedral of Santo Domingo, with its rooster and hen inside, was very close to the hostel. By the time the six o'clock bells rang, I had been spending some time in bed, and at that time, it seemed to me that most of the people were dancing, so I got up too.
I said goodbye to Toni, who was having breakfast in the dining room. Today, I intended to distance myself from him and go on my own, which would be easier to achieve because we were in the middle of the French Way and the accommodation options were varied. He had told her that in Belorado he planned to go to a hostel that he had kept his eye on from home, one with very good opinions on the internet.
—It has a garden with a heated pool. “And they offer a yoga session for pilgrims,” I told him, adding that I used to practice yoga.
He seemed to understand it. He would sleep in a public shelter, as always.
—Well, we'll see you in Belorado.
When I came out I was impressed by the number of people walking in the street despite it being still dark at night. I went into a cafe a few steps from the hostel. The only waiter there was slow in serving breakfast because, apparently, the coffee machine was not working properly. He was getting nervous, as his clientele was piling up and kept coming into the establishment. I was also getting nervous as I waited for him to attend to me and, through the window that overlooked the street, I saw the influx of pilgrims continuing on their way. In the end I got overwhelmed and left the place without having ordered anything.
I began to follow the groups that were ahead of me, without noticing or remembering the yellow arrows. With the poor lighting from the streetlights, the signage didn't stand out either, and I hadn't thought of taking the flashlight out of my backpack. In any case, so many people (about twenty) couldn't be wrong, so I went after, confident. And when we reached the end of the town center and entered the darkness in a herd, suddenly, a local who was going out to work in the field shouted to us from the other side of a detour:
-Hey!! But where are you going? The road is this way!
There were some giggles as we all quickly turned around, uncomfortable as our gregarious behavior was evident. Apparently, I wasn't the only one blindly following others.
Shortly after, I noticed discomfort in my left foot and instinctively slowed down. But I didn't want to give it importance, it would pass. Or rather I didn't want him to bother me at that moment, when it was getting light and I was beginning to pay more attention to the pilgrims in front of me and those coming behind. I had the feeling that I was part of something like an exodus. I was walking slower than average and they passed me every little while telling me "buen Camino!" with an often foreign accent. I was wondering where they were from. I also began to greet everyone this way, taking the initiative when I caught up with someone who was slower. And so I began to feel part of that community.
The landscape opened up to large fields of sunflowers and, after Grañón (where I had breakfast, taking my time to relax my sore foot), to large fields of already harvested cereal. With the morning late, I entered the province of Burgos and realized that the crowd had dispersed. And, although pilgrims were never stopped, I was relieved to see that in Castile the space was widening and it was possible to walk calmly as if alone.
In Belorado, looking for my accommodation, I passed in front of the parish hostel and there I found Toni, sitting outside at one of the tables with chairs that they had as a terrace, all showered and combed, preparing a ham sandwich. He had not been able to get there first because "there is no way to catch up with these early-rising psychopaths," he told me, referring to an Asian who was sitting a few meters away and who had slept in our room in Santo Domingo. Apparently the parish hostel was fine, no frills but clean, and there were still not many people. Indeed, he seemed calm and, for a moment, it crossed my mind to stay there with him, but I said goodbye until later and continued to the Cuatro Cantones, which is what my hostel was called.
At reception I met a small group of pilgrims who had just arrived before me. They had reserved a place, and they had done well because there were only two free bunk beds, the manager, a young woman with a permanent smile that reminded me of the excellent ratings that this private establishment received, told them in perfect English. While she was logging them in on her laptop, she asked them if they wanted to sign up for the community dinner for the pilgrims, which usually had a great atmosphere as they organized some group activity for people to participate in.
I went out into the street. There was still time to go back to Toni. I put on my back the backpack I had left outside by the door and hurried in the direction of the parish hostel. But after traveling about fifty meters, I stopped, hesitating. What was he doing? Why was he fleeing? And above all, how would he explain it? I turned around and returned to the Four Cantons. The previous group had already entered and the hall was clear. I was left with one of the last two available places, and when the manager asked me if she wanted to sign me up for the community dinner, I told her no, I didn't want to. Nobody forced me to do it, I don't know what wire I had crossed.
What I did do after settling in, shaving, showering, putting cream on my feet, washing my clothes and hanging them up, was go down to eat the menu of the day at the hostel itself. Apparently, in the private hostels, the business was supported by the kitchen, and perhaps because it was Saturday, their restaurant was full of families from Belorado or the surrounding area and non-pilgrims. Beans, hake, bread, wine and flan. He had not eaten from a plate and tablecloth for a week. I had to wait a long time to be served, but I didn't mind because next to my table there was a plug with which I recharged my phone and rested while reading the news.
The hostel was stylishly decorated and the atmosphere was pleasant. Except in the rooms, everywhere (also in the bathrooms) background music played with the best international songs of recent years. They were somewhat melancholic songs that made me feel homesick while I tried to write something in the common area. I went out to the garden and sat in a chair in the shade of some olive trees, occasionally watching someone swim in the heated pool. It's a shame I didn't feel like taking a bath. I remembered the yoga session they supposedly offered and I went to the reception to ask. No, there wasn't already, the always smiling girl told me, just as she said on the website, that service was offered only during the summer (they forgot to specify that her summer was limited to July and August).
At dusk I went for a walk through the streets of Belorado, a town with shops, most of them closed at that time on Saturday. I would have liked to go sightseeing with some formality, just as I had imagined I would do in the towns I visited, but the truth is that I didn't really feel like it and my foot was sore. I missed my wife, I would call her later to talk to her. Meanwhile, I walked the so-called Paseo del Animo, a little dejected, to see if it had an effect. It was a kind of Hollywood Walk of Fame that they had set up along the urban route of the Camino de Santiago. Some famous personalities had already left their foot and hand prints there, for example the actor Martin Sheen as the protagonist of The Way, whose plaque I took a photo of.
I sat on a bench in the Plaza Mayor, in front of the bandstand, with nothing to do. You could see a lot of pilgrims wandering around and also people from the town walking and going to bars. Then Toni appeared, who was also walking around. I was very happy. We went to have a beer and then went to a supermarket to buy something for the next day. We said goodbye soon because he had to return to the parish shelter, since he did have a community dinner, "as a donation." Due to our different plans for the next two stages, as we would probably not see each other until Burgos, before separating we gave each other phone numbers, this time at my suggestion.
08. Belorado — San Juan de Ortega (23.9 km)
In the same Cuatro Cantones hostel I had a buffet breakfast, like in a hotel. I helped myself to juice, toast, fried eggs with bacon, and coffee with milk. The dining room was small and the manager told you where to stand to fill the free spaces on the tables. Shortly after taking my seat, a blonde girl with a foreign appearance sat opposite me.
"Good morning," I greeted her.
"Good morning," he answered, raising his eyebrows and opening his eyes wide, with which I interpreted the following: "Good morning, but I don't speak Spanish, so if you want to communicate with me you will have to do so in English."
Her name was Agnes and she was Danish. We commented something about the large number of people who were doing the Camino de Santiago in September, she had also assumed that this would be quieter than in the middle of summer.
"In fact, tonight I took the last vacant spot in the hostel," he told me.
—Did you sleep in the Koreans' room?
—Yes, and they are very kind after all, when I went to bed they asked my permission to turn on the lights early in the morning, at five, which is when they get up. How do you know I shared a room with them?
I explained to her that, if she occupied the last bunk, the penultimate one was for me. Of the two beds that the manager offered me, instead of sleeping with the group of Koreans I preferred to do so in another smaller room. Afterwards I regretted my choice. It turned out that it was a small attic room that accommodated eight people and not one more. It only had one small window, insufficient to ventilate an attic room in which it was very hot. I spent the night sweating, with my back wet in my polyester sleeping bag. There were no Koreans there, but someone still got up at five in the morning, with the consequent clatter of bags while preparing the backpack. And then others did the same. At six o'clock I got up and felt a great relief when I left the stress of that little room in which there was no one left. It occurred to me that, perhaps, people woke up so early because they wanted to escape the crowded bedrooms as soon as possible and breathe fresh air.
—No reservations? —I asked Agnes.
—I don't like it, I haven't come to do the Camino to make reservations for fear of running out of space.
I told him I thought the same.
And that, when I said it, sounded very good. But when I went out into the street, while I was tightening the straps on my backpack to get going, I heard a group of Spanish pilgrims with their cell phones in their hands say that they had called the hostels in Agés (the reference town at that stage). ) and that they had been told that they were full ("the town is taken over by the Koreans," they added), and that since the monastery of San Juan de Ortega couldn't reserve a reservation and it usually filled up quickly, it was best to be quick.
Then I started to get overwhelmed again, especially because from the first steps I realized that my left foot was still hurting. It was a pain that encompassed the entire foot but was especially noticeable in the ankle and back. I think for the first time I realized that things could really go wrong if I wasn't careful. And I also began to look with resentment at those pilgrims who used the luggage transport services and passed me at a brisk pace, with a little backpack on their backs in which they seemed to be carrying an apple and water.
It was going very slow. My head, on the other hand, raced. If I didn't run, it was most likely that by the time I got to San Juan de Ortega I would find it full. Then I would have to continue walking to Agés, but there would be no room here either (damn Koreans) and then I would have to continue to Atapuerca, but it would be too many kilometers for my injured foot, which that day was not in a position to walk that much. Furthermore, who assured me that there would be no accommodation problem in Atapuerca? I should make a reservation, I told myself; but no, no way, damn it, I had not come to the Camino to be reserved, but to be calm, to meet with myself, with my fears, to think about what I was going to do with my life.
This is how I traveled the first few kilometers, until an idea occurred to me. I checked the weather forecast and the expected temperatures for that area on my phone. It was going to be a very good night: clear sky, sixteen degrees, no wind: perfect for sleeping outside and seeing the stars. That's it, I told myself, I've got it. And suddenly, I felt excited about the idea of ​​bivouacing for the first time in my life. There was the problem of humidity, because I hadn't brought the mat-just-in-case, but I had enough shelter. I was more worried about the fear that would happen as soon as I heard some noise of branches in the dark. But I would survive and then I could write about the experience, I would share it on the blog and it would be phenomenal, very adventurous. I don't think I would have dared on my own initiative and I was grateful that circumstances forced me to do so. It was decided: in case there was no room at the San Juan de Ortega shelter, I would look for a quiet place nearby, perhaps in a clearing in the forest.
In fact, now I preferred to stay outside and I slowed down my pace even more to arrive definitely late. In Villafranca Montes de Oca I sat under an umbrella on the terrace of a bar and had a coffee with milk while waiting for time. Then I began the climb towards Alto de la Pedraja through forests of oaks and holm oaks. My foot continued to hurt, but I was very careful, leaning on the cane with my left hand to unload some of the weight on that side (the cane as a crutch). I passed by the monument to those shot in 1936, but, like in so many other special places on the Camino, I didn't give it a single thought, I was so absorbed in my things and my foot.
In the middle of a pine forest, I came to an open-air stall where they offered coffee, soft drinks, cookies and fruit, in exchange for a donation. The Oasis of the Road, it was called. There were hammocks stretched between the trees, and seats and little tables made from sections of logs. Summer party music was playing. "What a good feeling!" I said to myself, as I asked the party girl in charge to serve me a lemonade and, gratefully, I left her a euro in exchange. She then asked me if she had accommodation for that night, since she herself could make the reservation for me in a hostel in Agés. So that was it. I told him no, and that I didn't need it, and, gulping down the lemonade, I continued on.
The majestic appearance of the monastery of San Juan de Ortega caught me by surprise, perhaps because after the twelve kilometers through forests I had forgotten that at some point it had to appear. I went to the door of the hostel looking for a sign with the notice “Complete/Full”. But I couldn't find it and, curiously, as soon as I crossed the threshold, I wished there was room, because all I wanted at that moment was to shower and rest in a soft bed. And when I went to the reception and asked, it turned out that it was: "No problem," the hospitalkeeper told me, who seemed surprised that I was so weak that year "when last year, around this same time and at this time, the hostel used to be full. Well, anyone understands it, I thought, confused and at the same time relieved. I settled in, shaved, showered, creamed my feet, washed my clothes and hung them on the clotheslines in the small cloister of the monastery. Then I took a light nap on the bunk. And then, shortly before dinner time, I went to the bar to get a cold beer and drank it outside, while I thought that bivouac would have been crazy anyway, because what was best for me was to rest. good.
Furthermore, by staying there, that night I would have the opportunity to try the local garlic soups. They had become a tradition since Father Alonso began serving them in the nineties, the parish priest who was considered a great benefactor of the Camino for the help he provided to pilgrims when the current infrastructure did not yet exist. I couldn't miss the garlic soups, because they appeared in the other book that I had read to prepare for the trip, titled I'll Never Get to Santiago. In it, its author, Gregorio Morán, describes a hilarious scene from when he took them in the presence of this priest, of whom he makes a devastating portrait that does not correspond to the image that remains of him.
And they weren't bad, at least in flavor. In fact, I would say the garlic soup was the most acceptable part of the dinner. Nowadays, in San Juan de Ortega there were no longer clergymen, only laymen, and instead of having dinner as a family, you would queue with the tray to have the food served in a large dining room. The problems started there, when I went to pick up the cutlery and glass, because I noticed they were greasy and had traces of dirt on them and it took me a long time to choose mine. You had to ask for the garlic soup expressly, otherwise they wouldn't bring it out (would they keep it overnight?). Then there were spirals of pasta with an industrial fried tomato sauce poured straight from the jar. And for the second, with some lettuce leaves, pork loin fillets that were like the sole of an espadrille ("one or two?" they asked you. "Two, man, two." Although I couldn't with the second one) . For dessert, orange juice that is impossible to peel. Bread and water. Ten euros.
When I went to bed, I thought that in a place like this they could always offer the same menu because the clientele changed daily. Out of curiosity, I looked at the opinions on the internet from pilgrims who had passed through there (before the trip I had skipped the ones on this site, as I had intended to stay here in any case, to try the soups). And that's when I understood it. That explained why there was no problem of places in the hostel. The hospitalier who seemed surprised by the low attendance that year had undoubtedly not read them.
09. San Juan de Ortega — Burgos (25.8 km)
I slept like a blessed person in the monastery of San Juan de Ortega, due to fatigue and because the bedroom was spacious: without a doubt I preferred to sleep with many people but in a large room with high ceilings, rather than with fewer people and in a cubicle.
Around six o'clock some early risers were already making a fuss, even though there were no Asians (normally they didn't stay in hostels where they couldn't use the kitchen, which was the case). I felt clear, so I got up too. By half past six I was at the door of the hostel. People were leaving, but I, in principle, and more so with the experience of the bumpy exit from Santo Domingo, preferred to wait for the first light of day. I got a latte from the vending machine at the reception and drank it outside, sitting on a bench. Everything was calm, it had actually been an ideal night to sleep outdoors. I looked at the starry sky, towards the Milky Way, and “Compostela” came to mind.
Observing that the pilgrims were leaving finally precipitated my departure. I checked on Google Maps where the next town was, Agés, and seeing that it was straight on a track I told myself that there shouldn't be any problems. I tied the headlamp to my head and, as if I were leaving on a special mission, I began to walk, leaving behind the lighting of the monastery and entering the darkness. Very soon I came to a crossroads where, although it seemed obvious where I had to go, pointing the light beam in different directions I looked for the yellow arrow to confirm it. But there was some ambiguity in the signage, so I began to doubt, I couldn't make a mistake in the dark and in the mountains. I took out my cell phone to orient myself on the map again and, between one thing and another, someone who was coming from behind caught up with me using the two canes that resonated alternately. It was the old man who had slept on the bottom bunk.
I had seen him for the first time on the previous day's stage, when I overtook him at some point (and I was going very slowly): a man in his seventies, tall and thin, with long gray beard and messy hair, with the suffering reflected on the face and walking with great difficulty. Late in the afternoon, when he appeared as a Christ in the hostel bedroom, I felt admiration for him and shame for my personal troubles during the stage. In his pitiful physical condition and being a foreigner, he seemed to hope to find a place to sleep wherever he arrived and at whatever time he did so. I had just woken up from my light nap and was watching him crawl around the room looking for a bunk bed. There were no more free ones below and he decided on the one above where I was.
Like most, I also preferred the bottom bunks. I preferred to have my backpack accessible from the bed. It was also easier and less noisy to go to the bathroom in the middle of the night. Furthermore, using the ladder with bare and sore feet was not pleasant. For all these reasons, I was happy when in San Juan de Ortega I occupied one of the lower ones. And yet, I had already anticipated what had ended up happening, similar to when I get on a city bus and I am happy to find a free seat, but at the same time I am not relaxed because I may have to give it up to someone more needy who gets on. the next stop.
"Thank you," the old man told me with a low voice that was at the same time serious.
He didn't smile at me nor did I see a look of relief in him or anything. He accepted what was offered, that was all. I quickly moved my things to the top bunk and he settled down with his slow movements.
Despite being bunk neighbors, we don't interact anymore. Except once, minutes before the bedroom lights went out for the night. He saw me struggling with a plug to charge my cell phone, it was a multiple outlet whose pins were hard and it was difficult to fit it. While I was struggling with that, the old man came towards me, but by the time he reached me I had already managed to connect him.
—Did you plug it in? —She asked me.
-Yeah.
"Good," he said, and turning around he went to lie down.
I was glad to have given him my bunk.
And in the morning, at that intersection at the exit of San Juan de Ortega, the old man did not doubt where it was. So I pushed forward and left him behind again. On the track that crossed the pine forest in a straight line, shining my headlamp on, I sometimes turned around and saw at a distance the headlights of his headlamp and those of other pilgrims who were coming in the distance from behind. That calmed me down and allowed me to enjoy my first walk alone at night through the mountains and under the stars. Three kilometers later, due to the fog that covered the valley, the lights of the streetlights of the urban center of Agés appeared wrapped in halos. It was beginning to lighten.
I had breakfast in the next town, Atapuerca, and then I climbed the hill of the same name, from the top of which the city of Burgos could be seen in the distance, surrounded by yellow fields. The situation was very similar to what I had experienced arriving in Vitoria a week before: the end of the stage within sight (but there were still more than fifteen kilometers!), heat and eagerness to arrive, an eagerness heightened by the sight of pilgrims who were more agile and would arrive at the hostel before me.
How did I let myself be dragged away once again? At that time, my foot had not yet started to bother me and it would have been a good opportunity to walk slowly and be aware of each step I took. I would have tried to figure out what was wrong, make small changes that might give me some clue as to why my foot was hurting. And at the same time, perhaps I would have used this attentive disposition to relax and enjoy the places I passed through and to observe that absurd fear of being left out or not being on par with others. Perhaps he could have done the exercise of trusting in whatever had to be, just like the old pilgrim he had met in San Juan de Ortega did.
But no, there was no way, that thing was stronger than me, so I made the same mistakes as always, I got overwhelmed and I started running in a rush of my own and I left myself forgotten somewhere along the way. It happened near the Burgos airport; There, you could take a slightly longer alternative route to enter the city through a grove of trees next to the river, instead of taking the official route, which was shorter but crossed industrial estates. I wish I could say that my choice was reasoned, that I took the longest path to enjoy the shade of the poplars even though, due to the state of my already sore foot, the shorter one was better for me. But the truth is that all I did was follow those who were ahead of me. And the problem was that this alternative was not well signposted, there were many yellow “confirmation” arrows missing, which simply assure you that you are going correctly where you are going. And since those in front were going so fast that they escaped me, I did my best not to lose sight of them by forcing my way.
I eventually lost them, but I was already in residential areas close to the city and it was easy to find someone to ask. My foot hurt, but I had put it on autopilot, so I continued at full speed along the riverside paths that after a few kilometers led to a park in Burgos. Even though there was no loss, I continually looked for the yellow arrows; I didn't want to go even a hundred meters too far because of a mistake. And then I noticed that these arrows were sometimes painted on the lampposts in the park, lampposts whose design made them look like question marks. What a good photo for the blog!, I said to myself, stopping instantly to take it and thinking about the text that would accompany it, in which I would relate the symbol of doubt with the arrow as an answer.
At the end of the park I crossed the river on a bridge and found myself walking along the sidewalks of the expansion of Burgos. As in Vitoria, I felt strange walking around dirty and looking like a vagabond among the citizens, as if I were a barbarian. I instinctively looked for my tribe, the pilgrims I saw from time to time among the crowds in the center of the city. And when he passed by them he almost shouted "Buen Camino!" so that, despite the bustle of the street and the noise of the traffic, they could hear me well and see me as one of their own; and some turned around surprised because, now that I think about it, in an urban and normalized setting like that, perhaps it was no longer appropriate to greet each other, and even less so with that impetus.
The municipal hostel of Burgos, located a few meters from the cathedral, was huge and there was no problem with places. There I met Toni again, whom I had not seen since Belorado. In the evening it was a pleasure to dine again in his company in the hostel dining room. With the pre-cooked “heat and go” that we had bought in the afternoon at a supermarket, we drank some cans of beer from a drinks machine. At one point he showed me his right forearm: on the inside, a string of bites ran up from his wrist to his elbow.
-And so?
-Bedbugs. They also make their way, like us.
In the shelters they were fearsome, they stayed in the crevices of the bunks and mattresses, waiting for night to come to attack their victims. We pilgrims brought them when entering the dormitory after having walked through the countryside, which is why they made us leave our boots outside, although we could also carry them in our backpacks or on our clothes.
Toni had been stung in the Belorado parish church. And I remembered that there, he had had an English pilgrim as a bunk neighbor (he pointed it out to me when we saw him passing by on the street, it was Mahmud, who I will talk about later), who as soon as he arrived at the hostel had lain down on the bed. just like that, without showering or anything, as if he came back from a walk in the countryside. I told him that, coincidentally, I had that man as my downstairs neighbor that night.
—Oh, well, be careful.
I liked to leave early to update the blog before the lights went out (at ten) and I was left in the dark, leaving my eyes fixed on my cell phone screen. But I often got caught up in the bull and had no choice but to do it that way. It didn't matter if I was tired, for me it was important to post the photos with their brief notes without missing a single day, this way I felt close to my family. And the blog had been configured so that it did not accept comments from readers, I did not want to worry about responding and thanking each compliment punctually, or vice versa, hurt by the absence of them, these things always took a lot of energy for me. However, I knew that in addition to my wife, my father, in-laws, brothers and brothers-in-law read to me, because from time to time I received WhatsApp messages from them in which they let me know and encouraged me. The truth was that in these daily chronicles I was exposing myself, perhaps because the distance allowed me to open up, something I had never dared to do, even less so since I wasn't working and I felt lost. And with their support, perceiving their esteem, I felt exultant and very motivated to continue with the task of telling about my journey.
That's why it bothered me to get confused like that morning running to Burgos, because I was sure that in this way I would miss things that I could later bring to my blog. And yet, it seemed amazing to me that in the middle of those clouds there were clear spaces through which ideas appeared. That same night, when I was trying to fall asleep thinking about the bedbugs that I didn't know whether or not the man sleeping on the bottom bunk was carrying, I got a couple of messages about my entries on the lamppost shaped like a sign. question and the feeling of belonging to the Camino tribe that he had experienced upon arriving in the city. I fell asleep feeling cocooned and no longer worrying about bed bugs.
At intersections, yellow arrows indicate which path to take. But there are also ones like the one in the photo, which simply confirm that you are doing well. As I am obsessed with not making mistakes, I continually look for them. And when I travel a certain distance without seeing them, a disturbing question mark arises in my head. But suddenly an upward arrow appears that looks like a hand with its thumb raised. And I feel comforted.
10. Burgos — Hornillos del Camino (21 km)
Around six thirty in the morning, I left the door of the Burgos hostel and went straight to the bar across the street, an establishment whose clientele was basically pilgrims and had the same hours. Upon entering, I had the feeling that there must have been quite a few people having breakfast somewhere in the place, although at that time there were only two or three of us at the bar. I immediately understood the reason for that impression: there were a good number of backpacks cornered in the corners. And not only backpacks, there were also travel suitcases (the Camino de Santiago with Samsonite suitcases!). With my latte in my hand, I walked over to look at what was on the labels hanging from them. During the morning, those from the transport service of a company called Jacotrans would come to look for them to take them to a (private) hostel in Hontanas, thirty kilometers from Burgos, where their owners would have reserved a place and where they would be heading light with luggage.
I wasn't going to go that far that day, the stages proposed by the guide I was driving were closer to twenty kilometers than thirty. Furthermore, I was not in a position to walk as much, because the foot problem was not only still there, but seemed to get worse: just as in previous days the discomfort had appeared after the first kilometers, this time it started to hurt as soon as I walked the first few kilometers. steps at the exit of the bar. The transportation service crossed my mind, it wasn't expensive at all and I'm sure that without a load my foot would recover quickly. But I ruled it out immediately because it seemed sacrilege to me. Rather than that, I preferred to stop and rest in a hostel for a day or two and then go see.
Carrying my things was important to me. It allowed me to be aware of what it cost me to carry them and value them (take care of them) to the extent that I needed them. In this way he saw more clearly the burden that the “just in case” represented. Before leaving home I had already done the exercise of including only what was essential. Could I really do without anything else? I started toying with the idea of ​​getting rid of a raincoat that would give me some warmth in case it got cold during the trip. It was the only thing he had to wear over the only track jacket he was wearing. Since I had weighed it before leaving home, I knew that throwing it away would save me about 600 grams.
Ever since my foot started hurting, I was obsessed with what I put in my backpack. Weight was a decisive factor when selecting the food I bought for the next day's stage (to the point that on the scale at the fruit store I considered taking one banana or another, depending on its weight). The previous afternoon I had gone to a pharmacy in Burgos to get ibuprofen for foot inflammation. I asked for the smallest container they had and, when the pharmacist gave me the box with the pills, the first thing I did was look up the weight in the product description. When I read "600" I was scared, because in my confusion, for a moment, I related it to the 600 grams of the raincoat, before I positioned myself and saw that that figure referred to the composition of the medication in milligrams.
Some took Voltaren for muscle inflammation and pain. An Irish woman my age called Fran, when she asked me how it was and I answered that my foot hurt, she told me that she had been taking it for a couple of days.
"And it doesn't hurt at all anymore," she told me delighted.
I was resting on a bench in the shade in Rabé de las Calzadas, and she sat next to me to drink water from the bottle she had just filled from the fountain. We had seen each other the day before, in my bewildered race along the alternative road to Burgos, she was one of the group I had barely followed.
Fran told me that she was happy because since taking Voltaren she felt great, so she would be able to cross the plateau quickly, arriving in León in six days.
"I'm doing the Camino in sections," he told me. In a little over a week I have to go back to work and my plan is to return to it during the next vacation I have, perhaps in the spring, to finish it.
For this reason, she extended the stage to Hontanas, the same place where the backpacks she had seen first thing in the bar went. In my case, getting to León would take me two more days, eight in total. I thought that I would also like to take less time, especially since the stretch between Burgos and León was supposed to be the hardest, with the sun and heat that were predicted for the next few days and the monotony of the desolate landscapes. Plus, I was feeling kind of discouraged. I remembered what I had read about what happens in the second week of the trip, when the initial enthusiasm and adrenaline injection give way to tiredness accumulated by daily walks, discomfort, and poor sleep in the hostels. Not to mention the pain. Because of this, what supposedly awaited me in the next few days had something of a "desert crossing."
Those landscapes also had something of a Western feel to them. From the hill from which Hornillos del Camino was accessed there was a sensational view. Under the midday sun, the road that undulated down to the town was white. Hornillos appeared in the distance between dry fields and a few trees, and in the background there were hills with slopes of eroded white rock. The only thing missing was the horses.
Gregorio Morán says in I'll Never Get to Santiago that when they arrived in this town, in the early nineties, it was like entering a Western movie, made up only of a long, deserted street. When I did it, Hornillos was still a street, but it was invaded by a crowd of pilgrims who were occupying the different shelters that were along it.
I headed straight to the municipal hall, which was where I would find Toni. I had decided that I would no longer complicate the issue of accommodation: I would always go to the public ones (where reservations could not be made), whichever one was in each place. This way I would avoid the trouble of looking at opinions, wondering where to go each time, whether I should book or not, it would be too much time I would waste thinking about these things. Furthermore, after my experience at Belorado (very cute), it seemed to me that I wouldn't know how to take advantage of its benefits and it's not like they guaranteed me a good rest, which was the only thing I needed.
At reception I was greeted by a young man who was probably Senegalese because he was wearing the shirt of the country's soccer team. He stamped my credential, took my information and asked me if he wanted to sign me up for breakfast the next day, for the price of three euros.
"Well, I don't know," I said doubtfully.
The truth is that I preferred to go to a bar to have my coffee with milk accompanied by whatever, it was one of my little pleasures. But I was embarrassed to be inconsiderate by directly telling him no, that boy surely needed the income he obtained from this type of services. He could have told me to think about it, but instead he just stared at me, waiting for me to make up my mind. He was making me feel uncomfortable.
"It's for you," he told me. Keep in mind that in the morning you will not have anything until the next town, Hontanas, ten kilometers from here.
I would have liked to find out for myself, then ask the bars in town what time they opened. But he kept staring at me and I noticed the unease that was already rising in me, so I told him yes, okay, I didn't want to make a world of that either (and I did want him to let me go instead).
In the bedroom I found Toni, freshly showered and combed.
"I've done pole," he laughed to himself. Pole position: I have finally arrived first at the hostel,” he said, pointing to the identification on his bunk, the one with bed number one.
He waited for me to settle in and, after shaving, showering, creaming my feet, washing clothes and hanging them, we both went to the bar next door, Casa Manolo. We drank the bottle of beer outside, on a bench, next to some locals with cachava sitting in the cool, and we began to look, as if it were a bicycle race, at the straggling pilgrims. Suddenly, we heard someone singing a serenade up the street. They were two Italians who, instead of carrying backpacks, pushed (or pulled) carts that seemed like a joke. One of them, with a long gray beard, shouted "Andiamo a Santiago!!", and alternated singing "'O sole mio" in a tenor voice. And to say it. When I went to take a photo of them, they posed smiling for me and then continued towards Hontanas, with the solace that they did.
The Hornillos municipal shelter was very small, a cubic-shaped stone house, on one floor with a basement, almost next to the church. In fact, in the afternoon, looking for some calm and freshness, I went with my notebook to write at the church, as if it were just another part of the hostel. Then, once “homework” was done, I was free to have a social life.
Being next to Toni made it easier to interact with the other pilgrims. That night, for dinner, we shared some white beans and a chicken that came already roasted in its container. In the hostel's narrow dining room with kitchen, we sat at the common table where half a dozen Asians were dining, all women except for one man. At first I thought they would all be Korean, but some spoke to others in English.
—Have you seriously confused me with a Korean? —Emika, who was Japanese, asked me when I told her.
We started chatting because Toni already knew her, at some point during the day they had met. He was delighted with her because she was a young and smiling girl and spoke perfect Spanish having studied philology in Salamanca. Emika was traveling with another Japanese friend. There was also a Taiwanese woman at the table and the rest were Korean.
In the other corner sat the only man in the group accompanied by his wife, both having dinner with their half-liter cans of beer. When they finished, the man, always smiling, mixed the leftover white rice with some seaweed brought from Korea and made a ball with it, then wrapped it in transparent kitchen film.
—This, very good breakfast! —She told us, raising her thumb and narrowing her eyes even more as she smiled.
At one point a blonde woman with very white skin, Irish who had a vegetarian bar and restaurant at the end of the street (The Green Tree), entered the dining room. She told us that at her place we could have dinner, or since we had already had dinner, have something to drink and share a song and a chat with other pilgrims in a pleasant atmosphere.
I went out to sit in one of the chairs by the door of the hostel, while the evening light turned golden like the fields that surrounded the town. To my right I casually addressed a woman who was Finnish, who told me that she had brought her two nieces to do the Camino as a gift from her for her recent graduation from the Institute. I had already seen them there, they were two very blonde girls who were always close to Dante, the seductive twenty-something son of an Argentine woman named Marta, with whom I also exchanged a few words shortly after.
To my left sat José Manuel, a seventy-three-year-old from Cádiz who said he was doing the Camino in sections. This time he had just started in Burgos and would end in León. In this way he combined the French Way with the Vía de la Plata, which he was also traveling, alternating them to advance along both in parallel.
Later I spoke to my wife on the phone. I conveyed my enthusiasm for that extraordinary diversity, it was amazing considering that, in addition, we were in a lost Castilian town with little mobile coverage.
"You won't believe it," I told him, "in the room we even have a retired couple acting out "Marriage Scenes." In this small hostel it seems like we all fit in.
The truth is that there I met for the first time with a few whom I would continue to greet for a good part of the trip. I didn't even exchange a word with some, but I would remember that it had been in Hornillos where I had initially seen them. And, that night, when I got into my sleeping bag, I felt integrated. I didn't even remember about crossing the desert.



In the background Hornillos del Camino. It looks like the landscape of a western. Many pilgrims refer to the Castilian plateau (the Burgos-León section) as "the desert." It coincides with the second week of the Camino, when the impulse of novelty wanes and fatigue and doubts arise.



Sitting in the cool on a bench in Hornillos, we watch all kinds of people pass by. These two horny Italians were pulling their carts singing "'O sole mio." And so much sun. They continued on their way despite the sunshine of the afternoon.




Emma, ​​the Irish woman from The Green Tree restaurant, inviting the group of Asians in the dining room of the Hornillos hostel to come to her place to have a Guinness. The diversity of people is extraordinary in this lost Castilian town.

11. Hornillos del Camino — Castrojeriz (19.9 km)
For those who signed up for breakfast, the manager had left everything ready for us the day before, so there was no need to come so early. On the dining room table, several bowls rested upside down on their saucers. The coffee was instant, you heated the milk in the microwave and there were biscuits and biscuits.
—Do you want to, Toni? —I said offering him a cookie.
—Ha ha, no thanks, I already have it.
Sitting next to me, Toni was having his own cookies for breakfast (I also brought mine in my backpack), but, otherwise, he was having the same as me because we had offered him the Nescafé jar and the milk carton, there was plenty . The day before, after telling him that he had signed me up for breakfast (he didn't), he had suggested that he take a look online at a user's review of it.
It made me a little angry; not because of the money (or not only), but because others had been smarter than me. But anyway, I told myself, these things could happen from the moment I had decided not to spend time looking at opinions. However, for Toni that was not the point. He considered that the public shelter had to be, precisely, the place where that spirit of solidarity that was being lost on the Camino was manifested, a space to share (he was the first to offer his food); Therefore, that morning he saw no problem in having breakfast with everyone and everyone's food, even without having paid.
And in this same line of distributing what there is, he was a devotee of the object exchange drawers that almost all the shelters installed in some corner along with the motto: "Leave what you have left, take what you need." He always took a look at them. (A few days before, in one of these places he had obtained some insoles for the shoes). Since there was also one in Hornillos, after having breakfast I waited for Toni to leave before approaching with my raincoat in hand the corner where this box was located. The weather forecast for the next few days was all sunny, so I carefully placed my beloved raincoat there, perfectly folded. Without being ceremonious, I wanted my gesture to be like an offering, because I was sad to hand over a garment that had accompanied me for years. But it was the only thing I had in my backpack that could be considered a “just in case.” I would see what to do in case the bad weather caught up with me there in Bierzo or Galicia.
I set out before dawn, like practically everyone else. She was getting a taste for going out at night with the stars, until it got light and the flashlight was no longer needed and then the sky turned red and the sun finally appeared. The dirt and gravel road was white and surrounded by the desert landscape of harvested grain fields. Stones removed by farmers from their crops accumulated on the edges; With them, the pilgrims, in a joint and anonymous action, had been raising small mounds that gave a sacred character to the path.
After an undulation of the terrain, a gentle ravine opened at the bottom, with beautiful trees that indicated the existence of a stream. The well-known San Bol refuge must have been there. That greenery marked an oasis in the middle of the desert and, however, when I reached the detour, I did not travel the two hundred and fifty meters that separated me from it to take a look.
But I was going very slowly and I didn't want to walk more than was strictly necessary. I thought I was noticing the effect of going lighter without the six hundred grams of the raincoat, because my foot no longer hurt as much. Furthermore, he no longer carried any food other than a couple of pieces of fruit and had left the hostel with the water bottle half full.
In Hontanas, because I wanted to have a good lunch, I almost went into the first bar offered to pilgrims, one that had a beautiful terrace at the entrance of the town. But I remembered that unwritten rule for tourist places that says you have to go to the second, never the first. So I continued a little further and in one called El Puntido, I had a portion of tortilla with a coffee with milk.
On the way out of the town, I noticed the number of swallows that were circling in large flocks above the houses. Despite the good weather, they were preparing to migrate, autumn was already upon us.
A little further on I heard someone calling me from behind. It was Toni, who came almost running, all sweaty with the visor of his cap turned back and with his cane as if it were a spear. He seemed to be in combat mode.
—But what happened to you? —I asked her, surprised that she had stayed behind.
"Nothing, when we left Hornillos I was talking to Marta, the Argentine, and I'm sure we missed an arrow because we got lost," he said, his voice breaking with effort.
Now he had to make up for lost time and he overtook me without slowing down at any time, as if he were participating in a long-distance race.
A little further on, the dirt road led to a country road flanked by trees in a fertile area next to a stream. "And suddenly the miracle of San Antón occurs," writes Gregorio Morán in his I will never arrive in Santiago:
[...] the remains of a medieval convent. The road crosses it in such a way that cars and walkers must pass under that pointed arch, brushing against the Gothic ruins in a painful state, inseparable from the road to which they give an air of a Bécquer legend or a Byron-esque travel image. A 20th century road that passes under a 14th century ecclesiastical archway! The dream of a mad architect.
Here I did deviate a few meters to see the ruins inside. I skirted the semi-ruined walls of the convent until I found the access door to what was the church and today is an open-air patio with gravel floors, tables, benches and some vegetation. Against the interior walls stood some small buildings, perhaps old sheds that had been restored so that they now served as shelters. It was closed when I arrived, but on the door hung a handwritten note that said:
Welcome. There are 12 beds, community dinner and breakfast. There is no electricity. But there is the magic of this gem. If you want to stay, get on the list. We'll come back later.
They signed it "The Hospitallers," and on the page they had drawn emoticons of smiling faces, hearts, and a peace symbol. Two people had already signed up, one of them perhaps being the young man who was resting on one of the tables. For the rest, he found me alone. I sat on some steps that must have once been used to access the church altar. Chamber music sounded in the environment at a very low volume, with no idea where it came from. I stayed there for a while, absorbing that calm and reading on the internet about the history of that place.
In the Middle Ages, the monks of that convent treated those affected by "Saint Anthony's fire", also called "hell fire", a disease caused by eating bread contaminated by a fungus, ergot. The only known remedy then was to go on a pilgrimage to Santiago, because of the care they offered in places like this and because in this way they replaced rye bread (the most contaminated and common in Europe) with clean durum wheat. Poisoning by the fungus was like a bad trip after taking a trip (hence the hell), followed by gangrene in the extremities and mutilations.
I stopped reading. I returned to the road and discovered that the music I had been hearing was from a bar with a terrace set up in a corral in front of the convent. There was no one there either. The problem was that all of this was very close to Castrojeriz and had to compete with the people's desire to finish the stage. The town was within sight and, yes, it happened to me as always in these cases: that the last stretch seemed eternal.
“Wait up, there are few places left,” Pascual urged me when he saw me arrive at the hostel as I passed by. He blurted it out to me with the reprimanding tone of a father calling his son's attention.
Pascual, the retired couple from the Hornillos hostel, was a Valencian who the day before had treated those of us present to some typical scenes of a Spanish marriage of his age. Amparo, his wife, prepared dinner standing, making the salad while she heated up the main course, while he waited sitting at the table with his headphones on, since he had played in the Champions League. In the room he retransmitted everything he did, what he had to do, as if saying it to himself more than to his wife, who remained silent. They were questions like: the cell phone on charge, the blanket on hand in case she got cold at night, remembering to give herself the cream...; and also the account of how well they were doing as a result of his foresight and good judgment. At family gatherings he was sure that he played the role of “brother-in-law” very well.
That "wake up" made me feel terrible, what did he know how I was doing that day. But in that advice (which resonated with me as a warning) one could also guess his uncontrollable need to control reality, even that of others, to prevent it from harming us. Because in the Castrojeriz hostel we practically repeated the same things as in the Hornillos one and that made us a family.
After dinner, at dusk, I sat on one of the benches with tables outside. I went out with my notebook to see if I could write, although there were many people out in the fresh air and the Spaniards were chatting loudly from one side of the terrace to the other. I took off my sandals to give my feet some air, and Pascual noticed one of them and exclaimed in alarm:
—But have you seen how swollen your foot is?
Indeed, it was a little swollen, it had been like that for a few days, but it didn't seem like that big of a deal to me. José Manuel, from Cádiz, approached me:
—Child, but you have it bursting at the seams. Doesn't it hurt you?
—But what do you do without putting ice on it? —Pascal attacked next.
He was right. In the freezer compartment of the refrigerator there were gel packs to apply cold and I had not even considered it, due to ignorance, carelessness and, ultimately, fear of admitting my condition.
And then they started to put fear into my body. Pascual told me to rest for a couple of days, to go see the doctor, that if he didn't reduce the swelling immediately it was going to break and he would have to go home.
"And you ran out of the Camino," he added conclusively, as if to say: Do you see what's happening?
Furthermore, he should do like his wife and him, who sent the backpacks with Jacotrans so as not to make their feet suffer, I didn't know how well they were doing.
José Manuel, for his part, seeing that the part of my Achilles tendon had become inflamed and that it also hurt a little there, told me to go directly home.
—Go home, listen to me, the same thing happened to me, I went home and in two or three days I was fine. "Go home," he repeated, "get well and then come back and continue doing the Camino, listen to me, it's the best."
"Come on, take off that ice now," Pascual told me after a while with the bag attached to his foot; I noticed a point of disdain in his expression, as if he were talking to a child to whom he had to tell everything.
I retired to my bunk a little dejected. Maybe they were right and I couldn't continue. Even though it wasn't even nine at night, I lay down in bed ready to fall asleep.
Soon Toni appeared, who had him under her again that night, as a bunk neighbor.
"Here, put this cream on your foot," he said, handing me a tube. And don't pay any attention to them. The further south, the more exaggerated.
He recommended that I rest and have a calm day the next day, to see how it goes.
—And don't eat the pot, it's worse.
"Besides," he added, "the foot can always be amputated if necessary."
While I was waiting to fall asleep I remember that I consoled myself by thinking that, despite how much everyone there seemed to know, only I had stopped to visit the inner courtyard of the San Antón convent that day.



Ruins of the convent of San Antón. To the left is the pilgrim shelter attached to the walls. "There is no electricity," he puts on the door, "but there is the magic of this jewel." They had a community dinner, I imagine it was between candles. I should have stayed. But I decided to continue. With the mystery of these decisions one forms the particular Path of it.



Common room in the Castrojeriz municipal hostel. It is indeed not a hotel. How do you deal with sleeping together, men and women, strangers, snorers? The only thing I can say is that you get into the dynamic, and that arriving exhausted helps you not to be worried and to rest, which is what it is about.
12. Castrojeriz — Frómista (24.7 km)
At the Castrojeriz hostel, breakfast was donated. Almost everyone had already left or was about to leave when I went to the dining room to have a coffee with milk from a coffee maker and the last of the bread and jam. I noticed a small bookshelf next to the table. In almost every hostel there was a mini-library with novels in different languages, read and left there by pilgrims. I had not brought any book from home, because of the weight and because, furthermore, it was not certain that I would read it. Thank goodness, because I would have had to abandon him like those I had now by my side. There was one that was a pilgrim's diary, a self-publishing. I leafed through it. In the chapter dedicated to that day's stage, he said that it was worth getting up early so as not to miss the sunrise from Alto de Mostelares.
I left the hostel around seven and arrived at the Alto just in time to see it, around eight. I realized that in my case, and at that point in September, it was just the opposite of what I had read: thanks to the fact that I had not gotten up too early I was able to appreciate the panorama at the moment when the sun rose. At the top there were a dozen people admiring the magnificent views. Where were those who had slept in my hostel? I didn't see anyone I knew. Some would have been very advanced in the stage, which meant that they had passed through there even at night. At four in the morning the group of Koreans had left, at five several alarm clocks had rung, at six practically everyone was getting ready. Definitely, I had not foreseen the phenomenon of early mornings and the desire to reach the goal early before the trip. It was said that it was to avoid the heat. Or maybe it was just that, when everyone stayed up late because of a few, people set off at dawn for lack of anything better to do. I think there was also some collective hysteria, for those of us who went to public shelters there was also some fear of arriving late and finding them full. It was what was happening to me. But now I had to go slowly due to my injured foot and thanks to that I was able to enjoy the sunrise in Alto de Mostelares. A dreamlike landscape, with fog in the valley and the semi-desert hills that were beginning to get sun. I approached a small accumulation of stones that supported a cross. Shreds of multicolored cloth hung from the cross, giving the place a Tibetan air. There was no wind blowing at all. Among the stones there were pieces of paper with small texts and poems, also some reminders with a photo of someone who recently died. I thought about the number of people who, in an attitude of search, had taken this same path before me; I felt close to them. I do not believe in abstract energies, but perhaps due to suggestion, it does seem to me that there are places and moments that foster certain states of mind. I remained sitting on some stones for a few minutes. Afterwards I took several photos and continued the route through a typical landscape of fields on the Castilian plateau.
I arrived at the hermitage of San Nicolás, located just before the bridge over the Pisuerga river, on the border between the provinces of Burgos and Palencia. At the entrance door to the church they had spread a large Italian flag. The Confraternita di San Jacobo di Compostella, an association from Perugia, was in charge of managing the hostel set up inside the Romanesque temple. I stuck my head out to see inside, but I heard someone speaking very loudly in Italian and it seemed to me that I was invading a foreign space and that's why I didn't go in.
Coincidentally that same day, a little further on, I saw another flag, this time Korean. Despite the great diversity of nationalities represented in this pilgrimage space, there were hardly any flags to be seen and that is why they caught my attention, as if they did not belong. At most there were those who had a small badge sewn to their backpack, like a sticker on the back of the car. Therefore, when a Korean suddenly passed me on the right at full speed, with his country's flag on his back and around his neck, the way athletes go around the stadium when they win a race, I couldn't. I stopped myself from laughing and quickly took a photo.
I realized that I barely felt any pain. Maybe Toni's cream was taking effect on me, I had also applied it in the morning before going out. When I put on my shoes, he decided to leave the shoe almost untied, to give my foot a break, since I was going to walk very slowly.
To celebrate the improvement, I took my time having lunch with a café con leche with a tortilla skewer at Itero de la Vega. And so, little by little, through a landscape of yellow fields and under a blazing sun, I arrived at the stretch that runs next to the Canal de Castilla under the discontinuous shadow of the trees. The mere sight of the water was already refreshing because it also announced the nearness of the end of the stage. It was almost two in the afternoon and at that time very few pilgrims were seen. In fact, almost no one was there anymore. Bad signal. And then, just as happened to me the day I was heading to San Juan de Ortega, I was invaded by foreboding thoughts related to the availability of accommodation in Frómista. If he was practically walking alone at that time, it was undoubtedly because everyone had already arrived. And if the day before I occupied one of the last places in the Castrojeriz municipal shelter, why wouldn't the Frómista shelter be full today, arriving later? Just like that time, I began to convince myself that I would sleep outside: upon arriving I would find the "Full" sign and at reception they would send me to some other private hostel in town ("If you want, call and I will reserve a place for you" , the hospitalier would suggest to me, "No!" I would say, spitefully, "I'm not booking!"), and when I went there I would find it equally complete, and then I would return to the municipal shelter and, playing the victim, I would ask to be They would at least let me shower and then I would make people like José Manuel, from Cádiz, or Pascual, from Valencia, feel guilty for their unsupportive attitude towards me, who was injured and had not been able to run like them, and then someone would lend me a mat. so that I could sleep in the garden of the hostel, because the temperature would be very good at night and it wouldn't be that bad either, I would finally make a bivouac.
There were plenty of places. I breathed. Anyone understood it. Apparently people had spread out to other towns (Toni, for example, had gone to the next one and some Asian women who were carrying a lot of weight in their backpacks had stayed in the previous one). On the other hand, Frómista's hostel was larger, something he had not contemplated. The hospitalress assigned me a bunk bed in a small room where she would sleep along with five other people.
At five o'clock the Frómista pharmacy opened and I went there, punctually, to get some anti-inflammatory cream like the one Toni had left me the day before. Also, I wanted someone who really knew about these things to take a look at my foot, I was tired of so many hostel pseudo-experts who "know" and tell you what you should do.
"Of course, of course, of course, everyone knows and is very clear about it," the pharmacist supported me ironically.
He made me sit in a chair. His foot was still slightly swollen, but I could see it better. I told him that he didn't understand, that in the last few days he had not forced the march.
"Yes," he answered with the tired gesture of someone who has repeated it hundreds of times, "what happens to you is that from one day to the next you put all those kilos on your back, and you start walking all those kilometers every day, and You still think that the body is not going to protest. Ha!
In his white coat, he was a man in his fifties, with a serious expression. I thought that, given the location of his pharmacy, he must have served many pilgrims like me over the years. Scrutinizing my foot, he asked me if the shoe was the right size. I told him no, anticipating that my feet were going to swell due to the heat, he had bought me some sneakers with a larger size than the one I normally wore.
"Then you may be tying your shoelaces too tightly."
TRUE! It was that! I saw it clearly as soon as she said it. I had been tying them to death from the beginning, to prevent my foot from dancing inside the shoe and rubbing me. In fact, I barely had to use the plasters and I congratulated myself because I hadn't gotten any blisters. But I understood that the man had hit the nail on the head because, precisely during that stage, he had worn the shoe quite loosely and had noticed a clear improvement.
—Did you pass by the convent of San Antón yesterday?
When I said yes, he explained to me about ergotism, the disease popularly known as hellfire or Saint Anthony's. Apparently, the fungus, in addition to causing hallucinations, had vasoconstrictive effects that decreased blood flow to the extremities.
—Exactly what you were doing to yourself by tying yourself up so tightly. Luckily it hasn't gotten to the point of gangrenous tissue and it won't have to be amputated,” she said sarcastically, but without altering his serious expression at any time.
He gave me a gel. To reduce the swelling I had to apply it after putting my feet in cold water. Nothing more, that would be enough. I returned to the hostel and grabbed one of the buckets used to wash clothes and, after filling it with fresh water in the laundry room, I sat on a chair on the patio and soaked my feet. Then I let them dry for a while in the sun and, when I was about to apply the cream, I noticed a small wound that had started to appear on the side, near the heel. It was my first blister.



I see the sunrise from Alto de Mostelares thanks to the fact that I haven't gotten up too early. Most of my hostel mates have missed it. It's a bit crazy, some get up at four or five and do a good part of the stage at night, like zombies with flashlights. They say to avoid the heat. And the landscape?, you ask. The stars! They answer you.



In Alto de Mostelares, the small mounds of stones that can be seen along the Camino (the largest of which would be Cruz de Ferro) could not be missed. Pilgrims who pass by bring a stone or leave a message, a poem, a photo, an object. It is a way of communicating something, almost always a pain.



A Korean with his country's flag on his back passes me on the right. It is not a common image, you barely see flags. And this is a magnificent thing considering the variety of countries from which the pilgrims come. It is exciting to think that so many diverse people can share an activity, without needing to highlight their national identity.



The Canal de Castilla was built to transport goods. But between one thing and another the train caught him, and with this new invention the canal became obsolete before being completely finished. Nowadays, completely alienated, it is used for boat trips and refreshes the sight of the walker who arrives at Frómista.
13. Frómista — Carrión de los Condes (18.8 km)
There were six of us in the small room in the Frómista hostel where I spent the night. Under my bunk was Pilar, a woman from Burgos, about sixty years old, who said she walked some section of the Camino every year. She liked to chat and, before we went to bed, she gave me her recipe to avoid swollen feet and blisters, she was also an expert. There were also two Italians, mother and daughter, and a robust middle-aged Dutch couple who had taken over two lower bunks.
As soon as the light went out, the man began to snore very loudly. They were the loudest snoring I had ever heard, scary, I would even say that they made the walls of the small room shake. I was immediately worried because it was clear that it would be impossible to sleep like this. Pilar made the pertinent muleteer clicks with her tongue, but the man did not flinch, he was sound asleep. The discomfort in the air was increasing, more and more sighs and snorts were heard. The Italian mother, who was on the top bunk of the snorer, pounded on the wall. It was also unbearably hot, I was in my underwear on top of my sleeping bag and, with the sweat, the fabric was sticking to my back. The bunk frames squeaked because we kept tossing and turning in bed. The Dutch woman did nothing because she fell asleep and she also started snoring, although less than her husband. Pilar ranted loudly saying that this was unbearable. The young Italian put on her headphones to listen to music at full volume. Her mother left the room slamming the door.
I cursed that man, how could he think of sharing such a small room? I had heard that in some hostels they asked you if you were a professional snorer, because they had rooms reserved for them. And it was at that moment when I realized: I was snoring too. I knew it from my wife, of course, and also from Toni, who had dropped it in Salvatierra. Much, little? He wasn't sure; He supposed not so much, although it would depend on the night. And then he worried I would fall asleep and start snoring too, that would be too much for Pilar and the Italians. But I needed to rest, the next day a new walk awaited me and if I didn't rest my foot would suffer. I began to have defeatist thoughts: the bad sleep in the shelters was going to kill me and send me back home. I felt trapped. I missed some earplugs, I didn't carry them with me because they were annoying. And then, out of sheer desperation, it occurred to me to make a couple of balls with the only thing I had on hand: a clínex. As soon as I inserted them into my ear canals, the snoring faded into the background and was replaced by the rhythmic sound of my breathing. I fell asleep instantly, I was exhausted.
I woke up at six, rested. He had slept like a log. My mouth felt very dry, oops. And, furthermore, I was lying face up. I was scared: I must have snored too. The Dutch, lighting themselves with a flashlight, gathered their things to leave at night. Pilar and the Italians seemed to be sleeping peacefully. I got off the bunk making as little noise as possible with the intention of sneaking out of there. Minutes later, in the hallway, when I was tying (not too tightly) the laces of my sneakers, the door to the room suddenly opened. It was Pilar, with huge circles under her eyes. You caught me.
"What a night, I haven't slept a wink," he said. He has been exaggerated, hasn't he?
"Well, yes," I said timidly.
Then she noticed my discomfort.
—Because you have also snored—that “you” sounded like a gunshot to me—but nothing to do with that man.
Phew, I felt some relief.
After that I didn't see Pilar anymore. I saw the Italian women from time to time on the road, I was embarrassed to greet them, but judging by their faces they didn't seem to hold a grudge against me. Regarding the Dutch, I did meet them again later.
The road between Frómista and Carrión de los Condes was a walkway with long straight sections next to a road that connected several towns in the Tierra de Campos region. The road was regularly marked by milestones with a yellow scallop on a blue background and, although it was not paved, it reminded me of the bidegorris of my land, perhaps because late in the morning I came across some ladies who had gone out to walk in the opposite direction. that of the pilgrims.
Shortly after, I caught up with the Taiwanese woman I had met in the Asian dining room at the Hornillos hostel, named Shan Lee (or something similar). She was going too slowly, taking short steps with the help of her two canes, conscientious and without taking her eyes off the road. She protected herself from the sun with long pants and a sleeved T-shirt that even covered the backs of her hands. She had the air of an oriental peasant with her hat, which, although not conical, was worn very low with the brim falling all the way around. Her bulky backpack must have been excessively heavy for how small she was, because, with every step she took, she swayed to the sides of her, giving her body a small jolt.
When I reached her, I greeted her and, when I asked her how she was doing, she told me that she had blisters and they were hurting a lot. Then I realized that I was doing well for the first time in almost a week and I felt sorry for her. I told him to be very encouraged, since the stage was very short and easy, and that we would see each other later at the hostel.
I left it behind, and a few kilometers later I began to see in the distance the last town before reaching Carrión de los Condes. The walk was a walk, I couldn't believe it. As I advanced, the immense mass of the church of that town caught my attention, with a giant rose window and dimensions disproportionate to the houses that surrounded it. That was Villalcázar de Sirga and upon reaching its height it was clear that it was worth visiting. But for that you had to detour to the town, just two hundred meters away, because the Camino de Santiago continued straight along the road. And once again, it crossed my mind not to do it and follow the tide of pilgrims who were ahead of me looking for the end of the stage, about five kilometers away. It was like the force of a river whose current carries you away. But no, I told myself, that day I felt good and I took it as a moral obligation, so I managed to get out of my way and spent an hour visiting the monument and then having my coffee with milk and tortilla skewer in the bar in front of the church.
Then I returned to the waters of the torrent and, when I was nearing the end, I again caught up with Shan Lee, who was still advancing with his short steps. Her shocked face showed her suffering and I decided to accompany her the last few meters to the shelter. On the streets of Carrión de los Condes we met Toni, who had already settled in, showered and combed her hair and was heading to shop at a supermarket.
—Come on, I'll accompany you to the hostel. —And addressing Shan Lee—: And you, give me the backpack, and I'll take it to you.
The girl told him that it was not necessary, "no problem, thank you."
—No problem? But if you can't handle it with your soul, please,” she insisted.
The truth is that despite his practically zero English, Toni managed to communicate and had something that could be called "charm", especially with girls. But Shan Lee I don't think she was up for nonsense and at most we must have been trustworthy enough, because she handed him the backpack with a polite smile (or maybe it was the grimace of pain).
"Damn, what are you carrying here?" said Toni when she checked the weight of the backpack. At first she hung it casually on one strap, but then she had to straighten it using both because "it was going to hurt her shoulder."
At the Espíritu Santo hostel, inside the convent of the congregation of nuns of the Daughters of Charity, they had everything perfectly organized. After registration, a nun accompanied the pilgrims to assign them a bed (they were not bunk beds, but beds!) and to show them the facilities, raising her voice very loudly, so that foreigners who did not know Spanish would also understand her.
That day had gone well; The stage had been short and I had walked at my own pace, carefully and at ease. Furthermore, I had taken my time visiting a church and had still arrived at the hostel at a reasonable time. I thought this is how it should always be. After shaving, showering, creaming my feet, washing clothes and hanging them, it was still time to eat, so I went out to look for a restaurant with a daily menu. Once eaten I returned to the room to rest in bed. And it was a little later, when I got up with the intention of writing at the table in the center of the bedroom, when I was scared to death: there he was, just a couple of beds away: the Dutch snorer from Frómista. The pharmacy must have been open at that time, so I rushed out to buy some good earplugs.
I spent the afternoon doing some sightseeing around Carrión de los Condes, I visited the monastery of San Zoilo. Back at the hostel, I settled at one of the tables with chairs in the convent patio. It had been a little late for me by the standards of the Camino, people were leaving. It seemed to me that it was getting dark earlier than usual, you could tell that the day was getting shorter. A few tables away was sitting the Italian with the long gray beard who, when passing through Hornillos, sang "O sole mio" for everyone. He was alone and circumspect, with his feet in a bucket of water, he was the living image of desolation. Happy nights, sad mornings (or rather the other way around), I thought, remembering the party I was having that day.
Shan Lee appeared and sat with me at the table. She had another face, he said that everything was under control and that he could continue the next day. At noon, when she arrived at the shelter, she had suggested accompanying her to the health center, but apparently it was not necessary. She was now smiling and dressed in light clothes and flip-flops, like a vacationer. I asked her if she knew where Toni was.
"He went to mass with the Japanese girls," he told me.
Well, the man had become pious, wanting to receive the pilgrim's blessing. It would be them, of course, Emika and her friend who were interested in attending and Toni would have agreed to accompany them. A gentleman.
—And how are you doing? Have you met many Chinese people doing the Camino? -asked.
I got the impression that she was a little lonely, although maybe that was just because she was shy.
"Very few," he answered.
-Goodness.
He frowned, not understanding. She asked me why she said that.
—Because if the Chinese start coming like the Koreans come, the Camino will be over. We don't fit.
For blurting out the joke, I was a little embarrassed, but Shan Lee didn't take it personally. She didn't even remind me that she was Taiwanese.
—I have read the famous Korean book that made the Camino popular in Korea, it has been translated into Chinese.
Wow, how scary, I thought. But this time I didn't say anything. That, reading that book that had seduced so many Koreans, explained his presence there. Then he added that he was taking a break from his life.
"I'm between jobs," he said.
Although it is strange in Spanish, "in between jobs" was the expression he used, something like "between one job and the next."
"Me too," I told him, and the truth is that that way of putting it sounded good to me.
And besides, it was true. I had also opened a parenthesis in my life. The bad thing is that I didn't know how to close it.



Between Frómista and Carrión, a dirt path next to the road and a tunnel made through a weeping willow. It is a good example of two things that characterize the Camino: its basic, unpaved character, and also the feeling that behind it there is "someone" who cares about its maintenance, helping the pilgrim.
14. Carrión — Terradillos de los Templarios (26.3 km)
I don't know if there was snoring in the convent bedroom or not, because I put on the earplugs as soon as I got into the bag and here there was peace and then glory. In the morning I was one of the last to leave the room, and it was still very early. Toni was waiting for me at the door, but we only went together to the first bar we found open in Carrión itself, there we had coffee and on the way out I exaggerated a very slow pace to facilitate his takeoff.
The stage had a peculiarity: the first section consisted of an endless straight of about seventeen kilometers in which there were no towns, nothing. It was very monotonous because there was nothing but flat countryside around. I walked and walked, and from the time it took me to cross it I calculated that I was going four kilometers per hour, apparently quite slow because they were constantly passing me.
So, after about four hours of walking along a dirt track, the last of them under a sun that was already beating down, I was very happy to finally see a bell tower in the distance. Indeed, that was Calzadilla de la Cueza, but until I reached its height I did not see the houses because the town was in a ravine.
At the entrance there were two establishments. I decided on the one on the right, which seemed the least crowded, a bar-hostel-restaurant called Los Canarios. I ordered a beer with a tortilla skewer, and when a while later I went to the bar to pay I noticed the advertisements that had been tacked to a cork panel on the wall. Among them was a paper napkin with the following poem written in pen:
From the pit in which the people lie,
in the distance the bell tower appears
between fields of a sea of ​​calm land,
as in murky waters of a swamp.
Piece of poem that had been marked by the inspired one who had passed by there before me. It resonated and everything when reading it. I took a photo of it and, when I reread these verses later, I had the feeling that, despite their gravity, they reflected quite well what I had seen when I arrived that morning in Calzadilla de la Cueza.
Around two in the afternoon I arrived at Terradillos de los Templarios and headed to the Jacques de Molay hostel (named in honor of the last Grand Master of the Order of the Temple), a name that sounded very chic in the middle of the Castilian wasteland. Waiting at the reception were two young Germans who had passed me a little earlier. The hospitalist hung up the phone and confirmed that at the Moratinos shelter, just over three kilometers away, they had free places for them. They left.
—Have you booked? —the woman asked me next.
-No.
—Well, then you get the last place.
«Wow, what a shame. There's no way I'm staying out, I thought sarcastically (once I had the bed secured).
"That's great, how lucky I am," I responded, however.
The shocking thing was that, for once, I was caught unconcerned, because, for some reason, I had not anticipated this contingency. And Terradillos was a delicate end to the stage to go on a plan like mine, because the two hostels in the town were private and accepted reservations. The hospitalist explained that September had become the strongest month ("just yesterday, around one o'clock, my hostel was already full").
I was assigned a top bunk in a small room for eight that reminded me of the one in Frómista. There didn't seem to be anyone on the bottom bunk.
—Can I take the downstairs one? -asked.
—No, I have it reserved.
It turns out that it was for José Manuel, from Cádiz, who appeared shortly after. I had seen him in the previous town, Ledigos, eating a lamb while I had a beer at the bar before attacking the end of the stage. José Manuel was a consummate snorer, but neither that, nor the small room, nor the fact that he had been on the verge of running out of room in the hostel put me in a hurry that time. Maybe because I had so much to take care of, including eating, that it was late. But after shaving, showering, lotioning my feet, washing clothes and hanging them, I lay down on the bunk for a moment and fell asleep.
When I woke up in the middle of the afternoon, my hunger had already passed. I decided I would wait for dinner with Toni and left with the intention of seeing the town and looking for a cool, peaceful place to write. But in Terradillos there was nothing at all, I walked around its deserted streets with adobe houses and I didn't find a bar or a store, just a multipurpose building that was the social center for the four cats that were left in the town. . From the façade of the church hung a tombstone with the almost erased inscriptions of those who had fallen for God and for Spain (with the Joseantonian signature: "Presents!"). The parish shaded a small park with tables at the back, and there I sat and opened my notebook to take notes.
Soon I heard footsteps; I looked up and saw that a tall and robust pilgrim, white and with two intertwined blonde braids, was crossing the park, with whom she had been meeting for days in the shelters, although we had never spoken. We greeted each other, and when she returned to my notebook again I heard her say to me:
—Sorry to bother you, do you know if there are any stores open around here?
Her English seemed good, although it was not native, and from her accent I could not deduce where the young woman was from.
—I'm afraid not, the only store is the one inside the hostel, I think they open at half past five.
I told him where the Jacques de Molay was. She was staying in the other hostel in town, one that (inevitably) was called Los Templarios.
"I almost stayed out, I don't like fucking private hostels," he told me, out of nowhere.
I smiled. I told him the same thing had happened to me.
—But I don't like them, not because I could have been left out, that would have bothered me, but, the truth is, it is better for me to make a living from time to time, because what I need is for them not to give me facilities, you know? "Him," she added as she took a seat at the other end of the table. No places where I can book and where they offer me to stay and rest one more day if I need it, which I would, believe me. Because how do I know if I really need it? You don't know how much I value public shelters, the crappier the better, especially because they force me to get up in the morning, everyone is gone by eight.
Well, I really needed to talk. She paused to put a cigarette that she took out of a cigarette case into her mouth. Suddenly, it came to my mind when I had last seen her: it had been that same morning, in the bedroom of the convent in Carrión de los Condes: if I was one of the last to leave it, she had to be the last, because When I came out he was still in bed, stretching.
Fortunately, it was almost time for the store to open, so I suggested we go there. She told me that her name was Irena and she was Russian. She really didn't expect this. Indeed, her braids had sounded Slavic to me. I would have liked to ask her what a Russian woman was doing there, but on the way she kept telling me stories about herself non-stop, and when she started ranting about the permissive upbringing she had received from her well-off parents and I don't know what, then I disconnected.
Later I reflected on the absence of comfort that Irena had told me about. In my case it wasn't that I needed someone to get me out of bed, my anxiety already took care of it, even sleeping in a luxury hotel would not have failed to fulfill my obligation as a pilgrim. But in the daily routine of the hostel there was something that helped: it didn't matter if I slept badly, I was tired or my feet hurt. It wouldn't have mattered if the weather was bad. In any case you had to get up from the bunk, pick up everything and leave. Regardless of how the day before had gone, I prepared myself and thus had the opportunity to check how things were going in the reality of the new day. Right or wrong, decisions were then made on the fly, leaving little room for guesswork, no room for unfounded concerns. I wondered if this was why I had let myself go that day without anticipating that Jacques de Molay might find me full, or that I was not worried about the presence of snorers in the small room in which I was going to sleep that night.
The small store in the hostel was very poorly stocked, there was nothing but drinks, cookies, bread, cheese, sausages and the occasional can. The thing was that you couldn't use the kitchen in the hostel because it was reserved for the restaurant. I was dying of hunger and decided not to buy anything to eat the menu they offered for ten euros. Toni, however, was not willing to jump through the hoops and bought a can of beans and chorizo ​​with the intention of having them for dinner with me there. At six the dining room opened and we were the first to sit at a table. There were no problems: the waitress, after taking my order (soupy rice, trout, flan) took Toni's can to the kitchen and returned its contents to her on a succulent, steaming plate. I proposed to share everything, but he refused, except for the wine.
After dinner we went to the town's multipurpose building to see if they served us any beer. There were older people playing cards, but also a group of young people from the region who were warming up for the imminent arrival of Saturday night. We sat outside with the bottles. It was still hot even though it was getting dark. Next to us a little dog was dozing and, from time to time, raised its head, opening its mouth to capture and eat the flies that were hovering around it.
Toni began to talk to me about the unique characters that he had met on his travels along the Camino de Santiago, those who had stayed to live there.
—They are people who “live on the Camino” —he told me—. They themselves tell you this, that at a certain point in their lives they took to the Camino and stayed to live there.
But Toni was not referring to the more or less idealistic entrepreneurs who had set up a hostel believing in the solidarity values ​​of the Camino and, at the same time, as a way of making a living. The Jacques de Molay was a good example of this, its owner had been taking care of it since the nineties. No, he was attracted to losers with a free and therefore peculiar personality, those who with hardly any resources had found a refuge on the Camino and were oblivious to the dominant values ​​in society.
—In the stage the day after tomorrow, in Reliegos, there is the Elvis bar, there you have to go in, where the Sinín.
A guy with a beret, Sinín, apparently didn't care if you ate it or not, you could take food from outside if you wanted because the important thing was that the pilgrims rested listening to the music of Elvis Presley, in a place that was an old house full of inscriptions and graffiti inside and out.
—And another of the mythical ones is the Ave Fénix hostel, in Villafranca del Bierzo, that is an authentic Camino hostel, you'll see.
He also told me about Paco, the hospitalero from Castrojeriz, a guy of the same species. Apparently, he grew his beard all year round and in winter he made his annual pilgrimage to Santiago, and later, in Finisterre, he cut it and burned it as in an esoteric ritual. When we were in Castrojeriz I was worried about my swollen foot and, unfortunately, I did not accompany Toni, who went with this Paco to have a few beers at the bar.
—And he told me no problem, that if I wanted to stay for a while at the shelter, that there was no problem for him, that he would have a bed in exchange for contributing to the shelter's tasks and that we would share the donations.
“Toni, the hospitalero,” I told him.
It didn't seem to me that he was serious, although it was clear that he was attracted to the idea of ​​staying and living on the Camino, perhaps as an idealized dream. It must have felt good recreating it while we had the second bottle of beer on the terrace of the Terradillos social center. In any case, Toni, who spent a good part of the year doing the Caminos de Santiago, in a way you could say that he was already living in it.



Patio of the Jacques de Molay hostel, in Terradillos de los Templarios. There is an air of camaraderie that facilitates conversation. You get a drink and you're already talking to someone. I came alone to do the Camino, but I had never spoken to so many people. My everyday identity was left behind and now I am just a pilgrim, like everyone else.

15. Terradillos — Bercianos del Real Camino (23.2 km)
It had not yet dawned when I arrived at the first town after leaving Terradillos early. At the entrance itself, I headed towards a house surrounded by fields that was the Moratinos hostel-hostel. Outside, on both sides of the door, there were backpacks leaning against the wall. I saw that one of them was Toni's. I took off my backpack and left it lined up next to his before entering the bar. (I felt like the stranger in a Western movie who arrives in a town and, by tying the horse's reins in front of the saloon, identifies the other horses and knows who he is going to find inside).
Sure enough, there he was, with an American coffee and a Neapolitan. There were a few more pilgrims having breakfast.
—Do you remember the length of the one that took my bunk in Hornillos? —He asked me when I sat next to him with my café con leche, nodding toward the other tables.
He was referring to a very tall man to whom he gave up his bunk because he couldn't fit into the normal ones. Initially, the big one had been awarded to Toni because, being more comfortable, she was the one they gave to the first to arrive at the shelter (the one who was on pole). That man was having breakfast there, I had already seen him when I entered.
-If I remember.
—Well, the other day, in the church of Carrión de los Condes, when I went to pilgrim mass with the Japanese, I went and found him at the altar officiating with the priest. He was dressed as a priest! Although yes, her skirts were short. Damn, I was shocked, man.
Oysters, I told myself too. Definitely, on the Camino de Santiago you don't know who you have as a neighbor.
—How do you say “cure” in English? —Toni asked me.
—Prist. It is spelled priest but pronounced prist.
—Like Judas Prist?
-Equal.
Toni got up, leaving me her cell phone with the camera ready and went to the priest. "You prist?" she asked him. The man nodded and then asked him to take a photo together. He stood up from his chair: mustache, glasses, gray hair with a receding hairline, shorts and sports clothing: quite an Austrian priest. He would never have said it. The two of them standing, Toni didn't even reach his shoulder. They both gave a thumbs up for the photo.
That morning I walked with Toni to the town of Sahagún, halfway through the stage (and also halfway point of the French Way). My foot was practically healed, but I didn't want to get excited and make the usual mistake of quickening my pace to keep up. So I accompanied him during that first stretch, but I told him that after that I would continue alone.
In Sahagún I remembered that it was Sunday because the shops were closed (in the previous towns it was more difficult to notice). We headed to a cafeteria-pastry shop and, before entering, we left our backpacks outside leaning against the glass window, in line with those of other pilgrims who were inside. In The Way, the character played by Martin Sheen also leaves his outside when entering a bar in Burgos, and it is stolen. When I saw this scene in the movie I thought they had forced the script, since it didn't seem credible that someone would leave their things on the street unattended. But there I was, doing exactly the same thing (of course Sahagún was not Burgos). On the one hand, it was a practical matter: the bakery was small and there was not much room for bulky backpacks. And on the other hand, it was a custom of the Camino: we all did it and by doing so we felt like one more. A kind of sign of trust towards the rest, because in any case there were only pilgrims there.
I arrived at Bercianos del Real Camino around two in the afternoon, in the worst of the heat. A town with old adobe houses, many of them abandoned or that served as sheds. The church bell tower looked like a watchtower because you could see its iron beam structure. As I read on the internet later, the old church had collapsed and the new one had not yet been finished due to lack of money.
Sweaty, I headed to the parish hostel, a restored mansion that had been a rectory and preserved some mud and straw partitions. As soon as I entered the hallway, one of the volunteers welcomed me by offering me a glass of water that was kept cool in a jug.
"There goes the hell, a guipuchi," he said after asking me where I was from. It was clear that he was from Bilbao.
There were three volunteers who ran the shelter, all three wearing yellow t-shirts with the Hospitaleros Voluntarios logo, which was a human figure with arms extended in an attitude of offering a hug. There was Marciana, a smiling Brazilian who stamped my credential and took my information to register. And also a completely bald Italian who was going to prepare us the community dinner that night: pasta.
That Sunday afternoon I went out with Toni for a walk, but the sun was burning in the deserted streets of Bercianos and we took refuge in a bar. With the beer they invited us to snack on some chorizo ​​and bread that they had on the counter. We left the plate clean, thank goodness we were the only customers. We ordered another round so they could add more chorizo. It was good. Then Toni proposed one last round, but dinner time was approaching and we decided to go back.
As soon as they opened the dining room, the five Spaniards who were in the hostel (out of a total of about forty pilgrims) ran to get together. To my left Toni and to my right Amparo, Pascual's wife, the Valencian, who sat in front of me and next to José Manuel, the Cádiz native. Others sat at our table, to whom we paid no attention at all during the entire dinner, since Toni, Pascual and José Manuel began to throw taunts at each other and it was easier to abandon ourselves to the chatter and laughter of our little group, than to have to do the effort to be polite with foreigners and in English.
Before serving us dinner, the bald Italian, who was the one calling the shots, remembered that there was a piggy bank at reception so we could leave our donation for accommodation and food there.
"Remember, with what you contribute today, those who come tomorrow will have dinner," he said, reciting what he said on a piece of cardboard attached to the wall.
Next they had to sing "The blessing rap", the lyrics of which also hung on the dining room wall. One, two, three... the Italian then started rapping, banging his hand on a table to set the rhythm while the rest of us accompanied him in unison:
This is the rap / of blessing.
Bless Lord / the food.
Bless my friends - bless my brothers - bless everyone / who shakes your hand.
Extend your arm / shrink it / and with this - everyone is blessed.
There was applause and great rejoicing that died out immediately because there was hunger. They left a bowl of salad in the center of the table and then served each of us a plate of macaroni with tomato and bits of frankfurter. For dessert, half a banana.
"Well, yesterday's people left little donation," said José Manuel. Wouldn't they be Catalans?
"No, they would be Andalusians wanting to be funny, but without having it," Toni told him before putting his half banana in his mouth.
When we finished dinner, the Italian master of ceremonies spoke again and asked for two volunteers to wash the dishes. We Spaniards, in a synchronized manner, lowered our eyes, turning a deaf ear as a Frenchman and an American woman offered themselves for the task.
But first he invited us to go out as a group to witness the magnificent sunset that was going to occur over the moor and to celebrate a simple community event. When we got up from the table, Pascual said that he was going to the bar to see if they were showing the League match (there was a Valencian derby: Villarreal-Valencia). José Manuel said that he accompanied him. The Bilbao hospitalero also excused himself by saying something about the Athletic game.
The rest of us headed to a small park next to the hostel, dry and open, from which we could see the horizon. We sat on benches and on the ground, and remained silent for the time it took for the sun to set. Then we stood up and were made to form a circle, and in the orange light of twilight, Marciana, the Brazilian hospitaller, sang a prayer for the pilgrims in Portuguese.
Immediately afterwards, the Italian lit a candle and we passed it to each other, so that whoever wanted it could share a few words with the others when it was their turn to hold it in their hands. Those who spoke were grateful for being there at that time and some remembered loved ones. Fortunately, not everyone opened their mouths. When it was my turn, I took the candle with both hands as if protecting a sacred fire and held it for a second, looking into the flame (appearing to be praying silently but very aware that they were watching me), before passing it to the next person. , relieved. During the round several languages ​​were heard, but not Spanish.
To finish, the Italian suggested that we give each other hugs while saying “buen Camino!” Next to her I had a girl who approached me smiling and with whom I almost bumped because I leaned to my left and she attacked me from the same side, that is, from her right. I quickly corrected myself and leaned to the opposite side, and as we embraced each other, she pulled me towards her with such force that she disturbed me a little.
I didn't move from my place and so I didn't hug others who, like Toni or Amparo, didn't move from theirs either. But some did the full round. Like Marciana, who approached me to hug me and the same incident occurred as with the previous girl, I didn't understand why she didn't fit in at first.
—But where is your heart? She scolded me-. “Coração com coração,” she added, putting her hand on her left breast and then on mine, before joining our hearts in a tight hug.



In Bercianos, after the community dinner at the hostel, we went to see the sunset over the moor. We have been like this, in silence, for as long as it has lasted. That they propose these things is very good, if not, you don't do them. They add significance to the travel experience. Even if you have to do something else later, like share a few words or give hugs.
16. Bercianos — Mansilla de las Mulas (26.3 km)
At the Bercianos hostel, in the “Leave what you have left, take what you need” drawer, I found a scallop shell, a mollusk that is similar to the scallop but smaller and darker in color. It had a small yellow arrow painted on it that was barely visible because it had been blurred. Perhaps they had discarded it for that reason, I imagined that they had replaced it with a shiny white scallop with the red cross of Santiago, which was what they took. I took the scallop and hung it from my backpack with a rubber band. I finally had my badge.
I had breakfast, I left my donation in the piggy bank and, after hugging Marciana again (this time well), who was at the door of the hostel saying goodbye to everyone, I left with Toni following the arrows towards the night in the countryside. There was a full moon and there was no need to turn on the flashlight, it looked pretty good. Toni wouldn't stop talking about this and that, and I remember thinking it was a shame, because based on what he was telling me I was missing out on a phenomenon that seemed unique. So special it was that even Toni was speechless when we finally stopped to observe it: in front of us, the lunar disk was turning orange as it approached the Earth on its descent. That was still a "moon setting." But what made it even more spectacular was the fact that behind us, the first rays of the Sun were already pointing. One entered, the other left. We took photos, but they were worthless compared to what we were witnessing. Mobile cameras were limited and the Moon appeared small in the images, it did not correspond to the supermoon that we saw. Upon touching land she disappeared almost immediately, as if she had been swallowed.
For a stretch we walked in silence, as if digesting it ourselves. Until we arrived at El Burgo Ranero (which, I don't know why, I got it into my head that it was El Burgo "Rainiero", and I said that a couple of times and Toni added "from Monaco", splitting us both up). of laughter), where we looked for a cafeteria and, after drinking our respective Americano and con leche, each one continued on his own.
At this stage, the appearance of the road and its surroundings remained unchanged for very long stretches: crossing a large expanse of fields, a straight dirt road beaten by footprints, next to a regional road on which there were almost no cars. At some point I went out onto the road, to walk freely on a more regular floor. But I got a big scare when a Jacotrans company van (I suppose loaded with pilgrims' backpacks) passed at high speed a couple of meters from me, taking advantage of the fact that she had the entire straight to herself.
So, for safety, I returned to the dirt road. Its width was enough for two people to walk through it at the same time. It was a walkway and yet it seemed to have ruts because some vegetation grew in the middle. We all contributed to strengthening these two parallel paths, since once they were formed, no one began to walk through the slight accumulation of gravel and grass in the center. And looking at the ground I noticed the white dust or grit that covered it, which was the reason why I had forgotten the original color of my sneakers (that is, they were blue). That white floor had something of a lunar surface because it was full of footprints, a multitude of drawings of shoe soles superimposed on top of each other. With my step I also left my mark there, but very soon it would be erased beneath the mark left by those who came from behind.
Another characteristic of these sections was the line of trees that accompanied them. They were still young, but one day they would provide good shade for the pilgrims. In the rest areas, which had tables and fountains, there were larger and leafier ones. I decided to stop at one where there weren't many people. Towards the north the mountains of the Cantabrian mountain range began to be seen. A fine wind came from there. Suddenly, I noticed that those who were in the park when I arrived had left and left me alone. I felt a little cold and put on my jacket. All you could hear was the light breeze moving the branches of the poplars, which were already dropping their first leaves. And I realized that although it might seem like a lie, we were already in autumn, and I had already traveled more than half of my path.
In Reliegos I turned off down a street to go to the Elvis bar, a must-see according to Toni. Maybe I would even meet him, since he had told me that he planned to eat something there to chat with Sinín, the owner of the business, one of those unique inhabitants of the Camino. Furthermore, he wanted to check that he was still in his place what he had left written on the wall inside the bar the last time he was there; Apparently, pilgrims making inscriptions had become a tradition.
The façade of the Elvis was blue and completely defaced. When I stood in front of it I had the feeling that the house was looking at me, it was because of the eyes that had been drawn in the two boarded up windows on the first floor. It looked like a carefree and even a little crazy place, the anarchy was evident, it was clear that there was freedom for everyone to express themselves however they wanted. "WE SPAK ENGLIS," read one of the scribbled texts, and I laughed at the spelling mistakes, wondering if the spoken English of that Sinín would be at the level of what it showed in writing. The chairs and tables were set up on the terrace, although haphazardly, and there was no one there.
It was closed, “Weekly rest” was written on a handwritten piece of paper on the door. It was Monday. A shame, I wanted to take a look at the inscriptions that people had left and see Sinín himself. In any case, I noticed that there were also things written on the outside, in marker, and I wrote down the following declaration of love:
With more damage than years
First I smiled for your ass,
then I lost my ass because of your smile
He passed through here on his way
your Santiago
I love you
It must have been curious to do the Camino calling yourself Santiago. "What is your name?". «Look, it's very easy, my name is like the saint: Santiago». Surely it would be the most original and picturesque to present one like this, especially to foreign pilgrims. Because in English no one was heard saying "The Way of Saint James", but everyone continually used the expression "The Camino to Santiago", which in my crude way of pronouncing it sounded like "De Camino tu Santiago". I don't know what I had laughed at before, after all, my English was also "I SPAK ENGLIS."
At the municipal shelter in Mansilla de las Mulas, they stamped my credentials and took my details into the registration book. Next I chose a free bunk bed, spread my sleeping bag on it and, after shaving, showering and applying cream to my feet, before washing my clothes and hanging them up, I decided to treat a small blister that barely bothered me but didn't go away either.
I had first detected it in Frómista, the day I had loosened the laces of my sneakers to facilitate blood circulation in my foot. That made the inflammation definitively stop, but in exchange my foot danced more inside the shoe and, precisely that day, due to a scratch, the happy blister appeared. Since then I had acted absent-minded, ignoring her, hoping that she would get bored of me and disappear. But since this had not happened, the time had come to take the needle and thread that I had in my toiletry bag and put a stitch on the matter.
I sat on my bunk taking advantage of the fact that the bedroom was quite clear at that time. I had never done it before and I didn't want anyone to come and tell me how to do it. Furthermore, it could be unpleasant to look at. The big problem with the common rooms was, obviously, the lack of privacy. I had discussed it with my wife one of those days when she asked me how I was coping with being exposed to the gaze of so many people, men and women, all together, sometimes even a little crowded. I remembered the vivid impression that the first crowded room made on me, in Santo Domingo de la Calzada. But I had quickly gotten used to it, I had gotten into the dynamic. It didn't seem to me that people were very aware of others, because the priority was resting. And yes, there was dirt, smells, disorder and lack of decorum, but it was understood that we were pilgrims doing the Camino. Therefore, as a practical matter, I immediately began to go to the shower directly in my underwear, although yes, my underwear was not a slip type nor was it white, but rather black, so that if one did not look too closely they could be passed off as some shorts But I digress from what I was saying.
The blister. He had it on the outside edge of his foot. The weight of the backpack had crushed my feet like the tires of an overloaded car, so that the edge of the sole rubbed against me more. In Wikipedia I had read that due to friction, the cells of the upper layer of the skin detached from those below and, like a spring, plasma gushed from the inside, filling that bubble called a blister with fluid. The plasma helped regenerate the skin, while also cushioning the area to protect it from further damage. But since you had to walk every day, there was a danger that it would explode while walking, causing a major breakdown; Therefore, sometimes it was better to carry out a controlled detonation.
I pricked it with the needle and the clear liquid came out, which I cleaned with a clinex. Then I threaded my needle and stitched it, letting part of the thread hang so that the rest of the fluid would drain through there.
-But what are you doing?
I jumped, scared. It was Pascual, it startled me, I hadn't heard him enter the bedroom.
—But don't you see that you can get germs?
He said he had to use hypodermic needles, the kind they sell at the pharmacy, and no sewing thread. And put Betadine on me, to disinfect the wound. And then put a dressing on top, to protect it from further friction. And put Vaseline on my foot before I started walking, so that it would slide and no more blisters would appear. And change my socks as soon as they got wet from sweat, especially if it was very hot, because the maceration was the worst. AND...
“Okay, okay, okay,” I interrupted, overwhelmed by so much advice. He was making my head spin.
I didn't do any of that. Exaggerated. The next day I took off the thread and forgot about it, because it healed. And for a few days at least, I didn't have to worry about blisters.



The Elvis bar, in Reliegos. A place between casual and crazy. The house looks at you. Sites like this, set up by Camino residents, attract, as do the stories about people who one day decided to change their lives.
17. Mansilla de las Mulas — León (18.5 km)
Around six thirty in the morning I went to the exit door of the Mansilla hostel and there I found Toni, waiting for someone to (de)part with. We set off and I decided to go through this stage in his company because the next day we were going to separate. This was his plan: from León, Toni was going to go up to Oviedo along the Camino del Salvador, crossing the Cantabrian mountain range. Then he would continue along the Camino Primitivo to reach Santiago. Next, he planned to take a bus to Ferrol to return to Santiago again along the Camino Inglés. And then he would go down to Lisbon to walk up the Portuguese Way. All before returning home, probably in December, for his sixty-second birthday.
"Sounds good," I told him.
As we walked I noticed that he was looking at me, but he found no irony in my face.
Toni must have had bedbugs in her house in Barcelona to extend the trip so long without wanting to return. What seemed clear is that he felt better doing the Camino, and that he lived with his “partner,” as he called her.
—And you don't miss her? -asked.
-A bit. But we are fine. I wasn't crazy about falling in love and getting married again. How lazy. Do you know what job? With how good you are in a calm relationship.
—But the comforts of being at home? I'm already a little tired of sleeping in hostels and eating pre-cooked meals.
—Yes, that's tiring. Like the backpack, it is a burden. But what do you want me to tell you, it weighs more on me when I'm lying on the couch doing nothing,” she said, quickening her pace and ending the confidence.
Just before Puente Villarente we entered the cafeteria of a hostel called Filosofía (it really was called that) to have coffee. When we resumed our march a while later, we met Pascual and Amparo, who were going at a good pace, light without their backpacks, since they continued sending them by Jacotrans. We went with them, but Amparo immediately had to retreat to some bushes and, leaving the couple behind, Toni said "see you later Lucas" to Pascual.
"If it weren't for this one, who is always pissing, no one would pass us," he answered angrily.
The stage was short and easy, and my foot had completely healed, so I kept up with Toni's pace without any problems. I was comfortable with him, but as always when I accompanied him, I had the feeling of not knowing where we were going. On one occasion I stopped to take a photo and then he also stopped to wait for me, but since it made me uncomfortable to keep him, I didn't take any more photos all the way to León.
Before eleven in the morning we were waiting for the shelter of the Benedictine nuns of Santa María de Carbajal to open, along with some Koreans, the Valencians who had also just arrived and many other familiar faces from the road.
The convent's hostel was in the middle of the Barrio Húmedo, so it was easy for us to go for tapas at sunset. But before getting to work we took a walk. Near the Plaza Mayor we passed a travel bookstore called Iguazú. I remembered that at the beginning of the summer I had been there with my wife, when we visited León on vacation. What a good time we had had without realizing it.
"Look, that's one of mine," she then told me, pointing to a book in the window.
It was I'll never get to Santiago, the title had amused him. We had seen pilgrims through the streets of León that day and, a little earlier, we had joked about the possibility of doing the Camino together, but my wife didn't seem fit for it.
We went in and I took a look at the book. I bought it. And three months later there I was again, in front of the same bookstore, this time doing the Camino and accompanied by a certain Toni. In some way, that book (or rather the title with its provocative point) was the trigger.
—What if I do it and tell you? —I said that day with the book in my hand to my wife.
With the nostalgia of that memory, I continued wandering with Toni through the Barrio Húmedo until we finally entered a bar. The plan was to have tapas for dinner, which they brought out, so we had to order "shorts" of beer if we wanted to return safely to the hostel. And the truth is that we had a great time at that kind of farewell party that we celebrated in the bars drinking, eating and chatting. Despite the annoyance he sometimes gave me, I had been lucky to meet Toni, because in addition to being a good companion, he had taught me the ins and outs of the Camino.
"Let's see: the good pilgrim," he said, as if to teach me a lesson.
In recent days we had reviewed the decalogue of the good pilgrim, as he and I understood it, but it seemed important to repeat it once again to be clear. Between the two of us we completed the list.
1) The good pilgrim was traveling alone. Along the way he met with others, but the trip as a whole was done individually.
2) He traveled on foot. By bicycle it was a different type of experience, the bicigrinos took less time but they passed by many towns.
3) He was carrying his backpack. Using the services of Jacotrans turned one into a tourist pilgrim, a turigrino, as they were called.
4) He slept in public hostels, he did not make reservations, he adopted the maxim that says: "The tourist demands, the pilgrim thanks."
5) Completed the entire journey at once, lasting at least a month, instead of doing it in sections over several years.
For me there were three other additional points that added intensity to the experience of the Camino de Santiago, I just didn't share them with Toni because I understood that they depended on each person's personal circumstances. These three points brought me a little closer to what medieval pilgrims must have felt. The first was having the possibility of walking directly from home. The second was to consider the pilgrimage as something that was done only once in a lifetime. And the third (and at this point I felt even luckier) was having never been to Santiago de Compostela.
And yet, the experience of the trip showed me how relative all of the above was. The decalogue of the good pilgrim that Toni and I had put together was not entirely true, or at least it was not something that should be taken very seriously. Now that I write this I remember a young, overweight American woman who had been delayed because she had had many difficulties during the first section of the Camino and who, seeing that she was not going to finish in time to catch the flight back home, from Burgos In León he recovered his days by renting a bike and sending his backpack daily with Jacotrans. I also remember an eighty-year-old Canadian grandmother who in San Juan de Ortega was waiting for a taxi accompanied by her grandson to take them to a hotel they had booked in Burgos ("eighty years old and today I have walked twenty kilometers, what do you think?" "It seems like?" he told me). I also remember the Finnish woman who had brought her two nieces who had recently graduated from high school, crying silently in the courtyard of the Jacques de Molay hostel, in Terradillos, because the next day she was going home with broken feet, but promising that he would return the following year to that same lost place in the Castilian wasteland to finish his pilgrimage from there.
And, without going any further, there was Toni, going around the Camino more than a merry-go-round. He would have reasons. And my wife, why couldn't she try to do it using whatever help was available? I myself was willing to break the first of the rules, that of going alone, to accompany her if one day she asked me to.
But I matured all this with the trip. At that time, as the "shorts" fell, our friendship was exalted in the shared certainties of what was right and what was wrong. At one point, Toni told me that she was sad to part with me because, from now on, who knows who she would have beers with. Before the drunkenness showed too much on our faces, we asked a waiter to take a photo of us. It was the only one I got with him: we put our arms around each other's backs and with our beer shorts held high, we looked together, as it were, into the future. We didn't come out very favored. Neither of us were very good at appearing in photos.
We returned to the hostel shortly before nine. I was already done for the day and my intention was to retire to my bunk and, with whatever lucidity I still had left, select the photos and write the texts for the blog. But at the entrance to the convent we found two very young nuns moving quickly, the skirts of their habits flying, informing the pilgrims that the blessing ceremony was about to begin in the adjacent church. We told them yes, that we were going now, and when we went up to the rooms with the intention of avoiding us, they followed us from behind, and that in that hostel the men slept separately from the women. But the nuns did not hesitate and entered in full force, shouting through the corridors of bunk beds, touching the shoulder of anyone who acted absent-minded in bed to explain it to them in perfect English if necessary.
It bothered me a little, although with the dizziness of the shorts I got carried away. "These normal things are not done," Toni justified himself, since he was not one to go to mass either unless he accompanied a young pilgrim. But since we had been caught, he, like me, felt that kind of consideration towards those who were sheltering us that night. So we went to the anteroom of the church and there, before entering, the very young nuns themselves explained to us the guidelines to follow during the event. Of the hundred or so guests in the hostel, they managed to gather about fifteen. We met the tall Austrian prist and Marta, the Argentine, who had no longer spoken to Toni since they got lost in the darkness leaving Hornillos.
In the church we shared prayers and songs together with the congregation of nuns from the convent, most of them very old and some even unable to stand up straight in their choir seats. The two very young women took the lead and combined Spanish, English, French and German in the celebration, also playing the organ, and I couldn't stop marveling at their energy and capacity, and at what had moved them in their minds. lives to wear habits. These girls, like the pilgrims, had also embarked on a spiritual path, but theirs did not allow half measures, it was undoubtedly much more extreme. I imagined them as twenty-first century punks, performing on stage in outfits and behaviors that were unusual for girls their age today. They had renounced their material possessions and in the nakedness that was visible beneath their habits they devoted themselves to an unconventional life, radically different from what prevails in today's society. While we sang in chorus with them, the sound of the music even sounded transgressive to me.

Mountains

18. León — San Martín del Camino (24.6 km)
One thing was good about the Benedictine convent of León: the exit door of the hostel did not open until six o'clock, a time at which reveille also struck: the hospitalero in charge of our dormitory turned on the lights and began to walk through the rooms. bunk beds with Gregorian music playing on your mobile. So, at least that morning, I didn't stay up early due to the succession of early risers and we all got up at the same time, like in a barracks.
—Where can we leave the backpacks so they can come get them? —Pascal asked the one with the target, who was a retired retiree who liked the turigrinos.
"Here we don't want to know anything about that, the transport companies are here to make money, and all they do is give a damn, and we're not here to make money, so we don't want to know anything about them," the man replied as if if he recited a litany without stopping walking up and down the hallways.
Toni said goodbye to everyone he knew, including Pascual, whom he gave a hug. At the hostel we had a frugal donation breakfast and set off.
In the streets of León, the yellow arrows made you take a detour so that you passed in front of the cathedral. That morning it didn't seem bad to me that they extended the journey out of the city a little. It was Wednesday, and in the square in front of the illuminated cathedral they were setting up fruit and vegetable stalls for a market. Toni was talking to me about something, he was even more talkative than usual, so I couldn't stop to consider that somewhat medieval image of the Gothic next to a popular market. We continued moving forward, we passed in front of the Basilica of San Isidoro and he kept saying, 'Come on, I'll hit you,' and I was trying to reconcile what he was telling me with what was around me. I would have liked to ask him to be quiet a little. We advanced through the expansion of the city, crossing the streets without waiting for the pedestrian traffic lights to turn green, since traffic was still scarce. At the end of an avenue we reached a park and, suddenly, on the sidewalk, we found that the yellow arrows drew a fork: to the left to Santiago, to the right to Oviedo. That was already San Marcos Square, the place where we had to separate, we had arrived earlier than expected. It caught me off guard and I think it caught him off guard too.
"Well, that's it," he said.
"Yes," I said, embarrassed.
Then Toni took the initiative and approached me to give me a hug. I leaned to my left without thinking and he did the same on his side, so there was no collision.
"No heart to heart, no wafers," he said as we separated.
We started walking immediately, each one on his own.
"Farewell," I said, raising my arm.
"You'll get to Santiago without problems, you're going well, keep up your pace, without fear," he shouted at me as he walked away.
I headed my way, but immediately, without stopping walking, I looked back at him. He walked as always, with his staff gripped as if he were carrying a spear, swinging it in time with his hasty step. He was still there, within my sight, and I felt the vertigo of seeing him go, I would probably never see him again. But I was afraid that he would also turn around and find me looking at him, so I straightened myself and continued forward. “Buen Camino, mate,” I said through clenched teeth.
I advanced like a ghost through the avenues towards the outskirts of León. Groups of pilgrims passed me and didn't say anything to me. After a while, I entered a cafeteria where no one was there and I drank my coffee with milk alone. Then I crossed a suburban area of ​​semi-detached houses that were half built, abandoned there by the crisis, between fenced open fields and with the doors and windows boarded up. At one point I looked up and saw the warm colors of dawn, and then I felt some comfort.
From León to Astorga, the guide proposed an alternative route that was a little longer but took you away from the national highway that connects both cities. I rejected the proposal and followed the original route, the one next to the road. I didn't care about the hassle of traffic or the ugliness of the route, I preferred to finish the stage as soon as possible.
At the entrance to San Martín del Camino, I passed in front of two private hostels where I saw pilgrims settling in. That's why, even though it was only twelve thirty, when I arrived at the municipal shelter I was surprised that it was so lonely. Sitting on the steps leading to reception, a man with a cap, weather-beaten skin and an unkempt graying beard was smoking a cigarette. He responded by touching the collar of his shirt to my “good morning.” He entered after me and, as he walked to the other side of the table, I realized that he was the hospitalero. In silence he stamped my credential and took my details into the record book.
"There's a community dinner," he told me in a rough, hoarse voice, showing a somewhat toothless mouth. Grilled sardines. If you want to sign up, tell me.
He accompanied me to the bedroom. But first, in the hallway, you had to leave your sneakers in the shoe rack, which was completely empty.
—Hasn't anyone else come? -asked.
-No.
Oh, God, where had I been? At that moment I regretted my decision to not look at hostel reviews on the internet. Also for not having stayed in one of the private hostels I had passed by a moment before. Where were my people? Perhaps the one he usually saw had taken the alternative route to Astorga. As I took off my shoes, I noticed that at the end of the hallway there were backpacks with their unmistakable shipping labels hanging. I calmed down because that meant that someone else would come, the turigrinos were welcome.
In the bedroom, the beds were numbered. I spread my jacket over the one with the number one and smiled when I remembered Toni's start in Hornillos: I had also managed to get a pole position.
As I shaved, showered, creamed my feet, washed my clothes and hung them up, more pilgrims arrived, familiar faces in many cases, so everything was fine again. At one of the patio tables, I ate a tortilla sandwich that I had bought along the way, along with a cold can of beer that the hospitalero had for sale. Next I felt tremendously tired. I went back to the room, lay down on my bunk bed and fell asleep.
—Did you really not expect it to affect you? —my wife asked me when we spoke on the phone that afternoon.
"No, not really," I answered. And, in response to her silence, I added: “This is how we are.”
It was she who encouraged me to sign up for the community dinner that night; at first, I didn't really want to. She was writing in my notebook on one of the tables in the patio, an area with grass and trees belonging to what previously seemed to have been a nursery school. Around me people were resting quietly, having a drink, reading or chatting without fanfare, it was good there. I realized that the only Spaniard was me.
"You, set the table," the hospitalier ordered me unexpectedly. He had come over to tell me and by the time I looked up from my notebook he was already walking away, the man seemed a little stressed.
Maybe he caught me off guard because he didn't speak English and I was the only one he could communicate with directly. I followed him to the corner where he was preparing the barbecue fire, so that he could tell me a little more about what had to be done, where things were and so on.
Immediately some people approached me to help. An Italian offered to prepare the salad, and the truth is that he was good at making it, it looked like something from a restaurant because of the arrangement and cutting of the ingredients. I asked him if he worked in the kitchen, but he didn't want to confess. We put the two wooden tables with a bench together and placed plates, glasses and cutlery (no two pieces were the same). I uncorked the bottles of red wine that, although cheap, were in abundance. And by the time the sixteen of us who had signed up for dinner sat down at the table, José, that's what the hospitalero was called, said that we should try the salad, that the first batch of sardines would be ready soon.
A blonde New Yorker with horn-rimmed glasses sat next to me, who was very happy that I was Spanish, since, she said, she had a lot of questions to ask me. José came from the embers for a moment to eat the salad, accompanied by a jug of beer but half of wine, which he filled again to the brim before getting up again.
-How do you eat this? —the American woman asked me when the first sardines were served, which looked black as coal on the white plate. It was also true that it was getting dark and there was not much light.
He saw me reach for a knife and fork, but José, who seemed increasingly smiling and relaxed, asked us all to pay attention for a moment, since he was going to give us a demonstration:
"In-espéin, you eat sardines like that," and using his hands he tore off the head of the one he had on the plate, and then he grabbed it by the tail and, raising it above his head, he put it whole into his mouth like if I swallowed a Catalan calçot.
We all applaud. But the American woman next to me did not see it clearly, among other things because she saw that I did not follow the hospitalero's method.
—But do they eat the bones? And the skin? —She asked me without daring what was waiting for her on her plate.
All in all, the sardines were good. And for dessert she served us portions of watermelon and yogurt ("yogurt for dessert? We have it for breakfast," the American continued, still astonished).
In the brief after-dinner conversation that followed I had the opportunity to ask José where he was from. His eyes were shining. He said he was from Madrid.
—And how are you here, boss?
—Well, nothing, I came to do the Camino and stayed here.
—And how about hospitality, are you comfortable?
"Oh, I'm fine here," he told me. Look, before coming here I was very bad, on the verge of losing it. But it's good here, right?
I nodded yes. It had gotten late by Camino standards, so we had to pick up. There was no need for an organizing voice, there was no need to look for volunteers, we all did something. I think we realized that, in its own way, that dinner had been memorable. When we finished putting everything away, I went out to the patio again to see how the night was going before retiring to bed. Sitting on the steps was José, smoking, just as he had seen him at noon when he arrived at the hostel. Breath deeply. It was good there, yes.



At the municipal shelter of San Martín del Camino, José, the hospital worker, caught me by surprise and told me: "You, set the table." At your command, boss. And this is how he has turned out, with the help of the other pilgrims who have signed up for the dinner. They are very modest dinners, but wine is never missing, even if it is a cheap red from Valdepeñas.
19. San Martín del Camino — Astorga (23.7 km)
In the morning, in the dining room of the San Martín del Camino hostel, breakfast was ready. On the table there was bread, butter, jam, milk and freshly brewed coffee, and the cups turned on the saucers invited people to sit down. My idea was to have breakfast on the way, but I decided to stay when I saw the care with which José had prepared everything. He looked like he had just woken up, but he didn't stop to replenish what was finished. While I was having breakfast I thought about him, about his limitations and the difficulties that I suspected, and, observing the interest he showed, I was glad that he had found there, in that lost shelter, the opportunity to feel useful.
As I left I thanked him. She gave a vague nod and slipped away without looking at me. I went to where the piggy bank was to leave the donation for dinner and breakfast, which was supposedly what José lived on (in addition to the sale of drinks), since the five euros for the accommodation were kept by the city council. There were no signs like "With what you contribute today, those who come tomorrow will eat," or "Donation is not free." Nor had he reminded us of it at any time. I left him much more than he had left in any of the shelters he had visited until then.
On the road parallel to the road, I traveled the first section of the stage at night. Starting from Hospital de Órbigo, there was an alternative route to Astorga, a little longer but more beautiful. Today, I decided to take it. The guide said that here you left the plains of the plateau behind to cross slightly mountainous terrain.
In Villares de Órbigo I passed next to a house in front of which a chair had been left in the middle of the street, to use its backrest as a support for the following note written on a piece of paper: «W.C. (Services). Toilet. No Donations”, with the “No” underlined. At the end of the hallway you could actually see the bathroom of a private house with its toilet and sink. And no one around, there didn't seem to be a catch.
In this same town, a little further on, against the wall of another house they had left a box of plums and a little sign on top that said: «For the pilgrim. Fuck. All the best". How nice, I thought, picking one up.
In Santibáñez de Valdeiglesias he was distracted as he passed in front of the bar of a hostel, whose terrace was full of pilgrims. I walked behind one who was probably American despite his Asian features. In front of me came a lady in a bathrobe and house slippers, with a loaf of bread under her arm.
—But where is he going?! That's over there! —the lady shouted to the one in front of me, pointing to the previous street along which, in fact, the yellow arrows clearly ordered us to turn and which we had both skipped, him by mistake and I by following him.
We turned around at the same time, like a spring, causing laughter from those who were on the terrace watching us.
The path became a dirt and stone track as it ascended towards an area of ​​scrubland, with small holm oaks and oaks. The heat was pressing. Arriving at the beach bar that a hippy had set up in the middle of nowhere was like arriving at an oasis. There were hammocks hanging between the trees, trays of fruit arranged on sections of trunks that served as tables and seats, and a kiosk with drinks whose motto was: "The key to the essence is presence," placed between hearts and a sun. A pilgrim played the guitar singing “Wish you were here” by Pink Floyd, while another accompanied her on the harmonica.
Nearby there was a height from which Astorga could be seen, from which the two towers of its cathedral stood out. As always in these cases, there were still several kilometers left that inevitably seemed very long. When I was approaching the city along roads surrounded by corn crops, Mahmud, the dark-skinned, fit British man who had been my bunk neighbor in Burgos, overtook me. He was already a familiar presence for me because I had subsequently met him in some other hostel and several times along the way. Even so, I was impressed again by his stride when he passed me near Astorga. No cane or hat to protect himself from the sun, he didn't even seem to be carrying water. It was as if I had gone out on an ordinary Sunday for a walk through the English countryside. He was carrying a standard-sized backpack whose weight he seemed to be oblivious to. If he saw something in the surroundings that caught his attention, he would stop, deviate to observe it better, ask whoever could clarify his doubts and then he would return to the route, surpassing you again with his light walk like a schoolboy with a backpack.
That day, as soon as Mahmud passed me, I got excited (he just needed to whistle) and I decided to follow him. He seemed to be happier than an eight passing everyone. I managed to hold on to his pull, although barely. We left behind at an insulting speed pilgrims who seemed to be suffering in penance, who advanced with short steps with the help of two canes. In the end I assumed he was being silly and slowed down and let him go. When this man arrived at the hostel, he would take off his shoes, take out the thick novel he was reading from his backpack and lie down to read it on the bunk bed, while around him the rest of the people carried out the daily routines of showering, washing, creams. , cures, meals and more. But Mahmud didn't even seem to be sweating. When he finished reading and taking a light nap, then yes, he would shower and get ready for dinner. Really, he was a vacation hiker.
In Astorga I settled in the public hostel of the Servants of Mary, which was one of the large ones with its capacity for more than one hundred and fifty pilgrims. The cells of the old convent were now small rooms where only four bunk beds could fit. When I came back from the shower, I found a Brazilian woman in the downstairs shower who was devastated. She had overtaken her shortly before reaching the hostel when she was chasing Mahmud at full speed. She told me that she was from Brasilia, and little else, because she spent the day stuffed into her jacket with her cell phone. The other two places were occupied by two Frenchmen, a man and a young woman called Geraldine, whom I would meet again at the hostel for the next stage.
I headed to the center of Astorga, which was very close, with the intention of eating from the menu. I was very hungry and that blinded me: I fell into the temptation of trying the cocido maragato. And I knew it was nonsense: ten types of meat plus chickpeas, vegetables, soup and custard. And in this order, because the particularity of cocido maragato was that it was eaten in reverse: first the meat and last the soup, so that everything would go in ("and if there is anything left over, let it be on top of the soup"). But I fell in because the Casa Maragata restaurant was the first thing I found and it specialized in serving only this typical stew.
I did what I could, even though the waiter encouraged me. Even though I ate too much, I couldn't finish it all. When I left the restaurant, I went for a walk around Astorga, to see the cathedral and Gaudí's episcopal palace from the outside. Then, as if I hadn't already walked enough that morning, I continued walking through the streets of the city to see if this would facilitate digestion and make it go away. Something (the chorizo ​​among other things) kept repeating to me, and I couldn't stop burping. A little later, when I thought I had made some room in my stomach, I went into a bar to have a chamomile.
When I left, I met Pascual and Amparo on the street, who were walking around.
"Don't look at the cooked piece we ate," Pascual informed me enthusiastically. We have gone to a place that they have told us is where they prepare it best.
—Yes, I have also eaten cooked maragato.
—First the meats: bacon, ear, nose, leg, chorizo, everything, up to ten; and then the chickpeas, the cabbage, the potatoes, and at the end a thick noodle soup, and then homemade custard with a sponge cake from here, look don't see...
-Yes Yes, me too...
—...how have we become, bursting at the seams, hey, and also cheap, because then at night with drinking water you already have dinner solved.
—How much did it cost you? -asked.
I was going to catch him here.
—Right now I don't remember exactly what this woman paid for. How much did it cost us, Amparo? And how much has yours been?
Wow man, so he had heard me when he told him that I had too. I should have answered that I didn't remember "exactly" either. But I lack the nerve for these things and, silly me, since Amparo didn't open her mouth, so as not to be rude I said that mine had been twenty-three euros.
—Ah, yes, now you've made me remember, ours was twenty-two.
—Coffee included?
—We don't drink coffee, and then we don't sleep a wink.
Okay then, you win, I thought. We then said something about the next day's stage and said goodbye, wishing each other a good digestion.
Back at the hostel I bought a liter and a half bottle of water. I started to feel stinging in one of my toes because of a small scratch. Here is one more reason for concern. Although this one was well deserved to me, for hanging around clever gentlemen.
In the room, the woman who was from Brasilia was still stuck in her jacket, typing on her cell phone. The space was too small and I decided to leave there with my notebook and prepare the photos and texts for the blog. I could have gone to the common areas of the hostel, but instead I headed back out onto the street, to an adjacent park. There, on a bench, no one would bother me. But between the heaviness of my stomach, the tiredness and the loneliness, I felt low. Mine was curious: I ran away from people, especially in large shelters like the one in Astorga; but then, and more than ever after such a pleasant experience as the community dinner the night before in San Martín del Camino, I missed her and I felt alone.
It was getting dark by the time I finished doing my homework. I returned to the room and found it with the light off. It was still nine o'clock, but the Frenchman wanted to sleep. The Brazilian looked like a ghost with her face illuminated by the cell phone. I climbed the stairs to the bunk bed, lay down and prepared to go to sleep.



One of those hippy-new-age beach bars that appear in the middle of nowhere. Good vibes reign in them: hammocks, logs to sit on, fruit, juices, coffee and cookies, all for donation. When I got to this one there was a girl playing the guitar and another the harmonica.



Arriving in Astorga, Mahmud passes me, who walks very agile and fast. In the photo you can see his stride compared to the step of the pilgrim on the left. I got stung and followed him for a stretch, until I couldn't keep up with him.
20. Astorga — Foncebadón (25.8 km)
I got up at six, went to the bathroom, got ready and left the Astorga hostel. I walked into a nearby bar that offered breakfast. Miraculously, the stew from the previous day had already been digested and its place had been taken by a great void. In the bar they had the TV on with the news from Canal 24 Horas. While I was eating my toast, I looked at the screen strangely, because I had not heard about the resignation of a minister or why they were demanding the dismissal of another. I was totally disconnected from current events, as if I were traveling in a foreign country.
When I set off I didn't feel the discomfort of the chafing that I had gotten the day before from the absurd race after Mahmud. So I found myself walking at ease and in good spirits. Although from time to time something that Pascual had told me the day before would come to my mind: apparently, the Foncebadón parish hostel only had eighteen places and it would be necessary to "smart up" to not be left out. I knew that, by chance, there would be no shortage of private hostels, but even so I was in the same old ones and the fear of being excluded was on my mind.
At this stage the Castilian plateau was definitively left behind. Through the Maragatería region we climbed the mountains of León with a gentle but constant slope. I walked without stopping to El Ganso, a town where I came across a bar called Cowboy. Toni had not told me about this place, but it looked like one of those curious bars on the Camino, like Elvis. It attracted attention because the Cowboy also had its entire façade painted advertising the bar. The premises occupied a small warehouse that in its day must have been a garage to store the tractor and farming implements. Inside, it looked like a auction because of the amount of old objects that were hanging behind the bar, a hodgepodge that I finally managed to make sense of: it seemed to be a collection of things related to the Wild West, among which the cowboy hats stood out. , although there were also other kinds, and all of this in a typical setting of a traditional bar with Spanish flags in the background.
—Can I get a coffee with milk, please?
“And without favor,” a man in his sixties, with a gray mustache and gold-framed glasses, answered me from the other side of the bar.
—How are things going, many people? —I asked him, looking for him to tell me something.
—Don't call me about you, damn it!
He served me a black latte, without foam, very strong.
—No, not many people are there. And in the afternoons no one,” she finally told me, softening it a little. Maybe I wasn't having a good day. I took a certain resemblance to the former football coach Luis Aragonés.
Ramiro, that's his name, opened the Cowboy bar in 1991, and he told me that he didn't understand all this about people walking at dawn and not even God passing by in the afternoon.
—Look, I don't know if it's because of the heat or because of the Chinese, but this didn't happen before.
I stayed for a while, observing Ramiro's somewhat intemperate manner with some North Americans who had just entered and to whom he was shouting to make himself understood in Spanish. The coffee he had served me was hard and I had a hard time turning it over. But he wouldn't have dared leave me without finishing it.
After The Goose, the landscape became more rugged. There were sections in which the path crossed forests of young oak trees separated from the road by a metal fence, in whose mesh they had inserted hundreds of crosses made with two intertwined branches or sticks. I thought that someone would have thought of forming the first one and the pilgrims who had come from behind would have imitated the work. Although on second thought, it could also have arisen as a spontaneous tribute to the American pilgrim who was murdered near here by a deranged local. It happened three years before: the forty-year-old woman left the road and then followed some arrows that the murderer had deflected so that someone would pass by her farm. He touched her. I remembered what I had told myself as soon as I started the trip, about always trusting the signs of the Camino. That woman had also left Astorga confidently that morning, but she never finished the stage.
In Rabanal del Camino I had fried eggs with bacon and potatoes and a beer for lunch. I had been wanting to do this for several days now. Furthermore, since I had separated from Toni, I had decided to follow a new food policy: no carrying it in my backpack. Not even water, just to go lighter. That I was thirsty? He would drink when he got to a place where he could do so. It was in the middle of the French Way and every so often there was a town. I mentioned it to my wife in a message in which she included the photo of the plate with the eggs, to make her envious. She responded that not carrying water seemed fine to her, although "risky."
—Why “risky”?
—Well, because I don't see you asking for water in a bar, and beer doesn't hydrate your muscles.
—How not? I have asked for water many times.
-Yes for me.
He was right. Therefore, when I got up from the table ready to attack the climb to Foncebadón, I was tempted to buy a bottle of water in a store. But at that moment I was not thirsty and, in order not to drink it, I preferred not to carry it.
I arrived without problems at Foncebadón, a mountain village located at 1,400 meters above sea level, which was abandoned until the revival of the Camino in the 1990s brought it back to life. I walked along its only street (the Camino itself), which was still not paved despite the cars that used it to access the hostels, bars and restaurants on both sides. It gave me the impression of being in a winter season with a wild touch, as if the place had not yet been completely domesticated.
Up at the end of the street was the church that had been rehabilitated as a shelter by an American Jacobean organization. Before the closed door, sitting on a bench, Pascual and Amparo were waiting, bored, along with Isidro, a man from Murcia whom he was about to meet. Nobody else. So much alarm for this. While we were waiting for them to open, we were joined by a Belgian woman and her daughter, and later by two Canadian girls.
At two o'clock the door opened and a man and a woman appeared, both blonde, about sixty years old. In basic, slow, hyper-vocalized English, the man spoke for both of them, smiling the entire time. They came from California and were volunteer hospitaleros for the American Pilgrins On The Camino association.
—Who understood what I just said? —Patrick then asked, which was what the man's name was.
The foreigners raised their hands and I did too, timidly. I felt like a child in a classroom. I had to act as an interpreter for the Spanish. Before letting us in, Patrick gave us absolutely all the instructions for using the hostel, one by one, many of them unnecessary because they were trivial. Between that and my translations, he kept us there for at least a quarter of an hour, and there was no shortage of the usual "Remember, with the donation you leave today, those who come will have dinner tomorrow." We were getting impatient. Isidro, the Murcian, ended up exploding:
—So much English, so much English, the mother who…, we are in Spain, aren't we?
I noticed with surprise that he was addressing me, raising his voice very loudly, as if I were the one who had irritated him. He added that he was tired and all he wanted to do was take a shower, eat something and lie down on the bunk.
-That? What it says? —Patrick asked me.
"No, no, nothing, he wants to know something that I'll explain to him now, as soon as you finish," I answered.
I cursed that Murcian, a rustic man, also in his sixties, for putting me in trouble in front of the teacher and the others. To make matters worse, he spoke loudly, although in his case he did so because he was half deaf, something that I did not know at that time. The opposite of him was a Californian with the fine manners of a congregation pastor, perorating to us with the smile of him standing there before us, who waited patiently for him to finish. The truth is that it was exasperating me too.
Since they asked for collaboration for the community dinner, after shaving, showering, creaming my feet, washing clothes and hanging them, I offered to cut vegetables and thus free myself from other tasks. At the dining room table I met the two Canadian girls. I took care of the potatoes and they took care of the carrots and onions. They were two happy girls who laughed at how slow they were going. They were not exactly in shape, and in their families, apparently, no one believed that they would be able to complete the Camino to the end. The first stage through the Pyrenees, from Sant-Jean to Roncesvalles, had almost killed them, and then, between the multiple breaks and the fact that they were going at a snail's pace, they accumulated a lot of delay.
—In Logroño we took a bus that left us directly in Astorga, but don't tell this to anyone.
The shelter, meanwhile, was filling up. When I finished with the potatoes I went out and went down the uneven and rocky street. I spent the afternoon in one of the bars, reading, writing and having a few beers. By the time I returned to the shelter, I felt confident enough to continue acting as interpreter during the community dinner and the subsequent “moment of reflection,” which was what Patrick had called the meeting that would take place afterwards in the chapel of the church.
Dinner consisted of a salad and a bean stew with vegetables and bits of chorizo. Melon for dessert. I felt like I was a protagonist because of my responsibilities as a translator, and so I was encouraged to start conversations with those who were sitting around me at the table, with the Belgian woman and her daughter among others. When they finished dinner, Pascual and Isidro said very loudly (but Patrick couldn't understand them because I didn't translate this) that they were hungry. They went to the room and opened their backpacks to complete dinner with what they brought, and went from going to the community meeting.
The bedroom occupied the nave of what was the church, but through a screen they had preserved a section for use as a chapel. Patrick climbed onto the platform that served as an altar and the rest of us sat on the two benches in front. He said that he was not even a Catholic, but a Methodist, but that it did not matter in the spiritual path in which all of us gathered there participated. He could be seen in the sauce of him speaking in public, he had tables. He explained the tradition associated with the Ferro Cross, which we would pass first thing the next morning. And then he told a personal anecdote as a parable for us to reflect on.
He said that this was the second year that his wife, Sandy, and he had volunteered in Foncebadón, but that the first time had been at a shelter in Grañón, also managed by the same American association. According to him, that was an experience similar to that of walking the Camino, due to the uncertainty about how they would perform as hospitaleros, who would show up at the door, those things. Towards the end of his stay there, a boy appeared walking from his house in Germany. Chatting with him at dinner, the boy told them that his father had given him these three pieces of advice before leaving: first, to attend to his own business and not worry about those he left behind, that they would be fine; second, that it should not be faster than his soul could go; and third, to take care of his body.
Two days later, Patrick and his wife finished their shift in Grañón and decided to follow the Camino to Santiago themselves. It was a coincidence that they met the boy again, this time in the middle of Plaza del Obradoiro. And, furthermore, accompanied by his father, who had flown to Santiago to meet his son at the end of his pilgrimage. Patrick proposed that they have dinner together that night, he wanted to meet this wise man so that he could give him more keys about life. When they met again and he asked him about it, the man replied that he had nothing more to say, that what he had told his son was all there was.
We remained silent. Patrick was already lighting the inevitable candle that we were going to have to pass to each other so that, when our turn came, each of us could share a few words, whatever came to mind. People said very nice things, one of the Canadians recited a poem that she had composed herself. When it was my turn, I did the same pantomime as in Bercianos: I took the candle with both hands and held it for a second as if reverence for the moment, so as not to have to open my mouth in return. The last one who had to hold the flame was a guy he hadn't noticed until then.
"I never thought I would find myself in a situation like this," he said hastily, releasing the witness immediately, as if it burned him, causing everyone to laugh with his spontaneity and relieving the burden of solemnity in the act.



Bar Cowboy, pure western. In the photo you can see the detail of the backpack parked outside, as if it were a horse that cannot be entered into the saloon. It is a custom of the Camino, one of those things that one sees done and imitates. At the Cowboy I asked for coffee with milk, but Ramiro served me a hard Americano, unceremoniously.



For a long stretch, hundreds of crosses formed between the wires of the fence, in memory, perhaps, of the American pilgrim murdered near here three years earlier by a local who had deflected the arrows so that she would get lost. One of the bases of the Camino is to pay attention to the yellow arrows, to let yourself be guided by them. And he looks.



In Foncebadón the unpaved street gives the sensation of a wild, undomesticated town. Cruz de Ferro is nearby and hence its resurgence, since the village was abandoned. Here there are only pilgrims and services for them, so in places like this you can clearly see the microcosm that is formed around this floating country called the Camino de Santiago.



Sandy, the Californian volunteer hospitalist in Foncebadón, takes my information into the record book after stamping my credential. Everything is very basic in these public hostels. The logbook itself looks like something out of another time. To the right of it is the piggy bank to leave the donation with which they will buy dinner for the pilgrims who come tomorrow.
21. Foncebadón — Ponferrada (26.8 km)
I had a bad night in Foncebadón. In the small common dormitory of the hostel they had packed in too many bunk beds, and the feeling of suffocation due to the crowding was added to the fact that the bed structures were made of wood and made a lot of noise if you didn't move. And amidst the noise of creaking, someone began to snore. I deduced that it would be Isidro, it seemed to me that they came from where he had seen him settle. I was afraid I would snore too as soon as I had rock left. To make matters worse, the beans for dinner had given me gas and I was uncomfortable. Although, judging by the creaking of bunks, he wasn't the only one who wasn't falling asleep, it seemed like we were sailing aboard a galleon.
But somehow we saved the night because in the end, I don't know how, I fell asleep. In the morning I would have left directly, but it was necessary to have breakfast because the stage was in the mountains. In the dining room, Geraldine, the French girl I had met at the Astorga hostel, sat in front of me.
-How did you sleep? —She asked me with a smile.
"Not very well," I replied. Too much noise from the bunk beds.
She had a theory about what happened and seemed eager to share it with me, to see what I thought: she said that the noise we each made when moving in the bed generated a fear of disturbing us and such tension that it did not allow us to let ourselves go freely. to take a posture, relax and fall asleep; So in the end, the anxiety of not being able to rest made us move more, causing even more creaking.
—Come on, it would have been better if we had not worried about making noise so that we could fall asleep, reducing the noise and promoting everyone's sleep.
He couldn't have been more right. A shared bedroom worked like a machine made up of complex parts that influenced each other, resulting in the good or bad functioning of the whole. Now, how did you do this thing of relaxing whenever you felt like it? I asked Geraldine. She told me that she had learned a lot about it on this trip, having set off on foot directly from her home in Poitiers.
—And how is the Camino through France? It is marked? Are there hostels?
—No, he is not very prepared. And since I don't have much money, what I did was sleep outdoors, in parks, in the countryside.
—Were you bivouac? —I asked her, amazed that a young girl like her dared.
—Yes, whenever I could.
—And you weren't scared?
He said yes, very much. But it was worth it because you also learned a lot, among other things, how to relax. I didn't know whether to believe her. Although that night at the hostel, Geraldine just had time to realize the tension in the air before falling peacefully asleep.
I set out at such an hour that when I reached the top, just two kilometers away, it was already dawn. And as I approached, identifying from a distance that the nondescript mound I was approaching was neither more nor less than the famous Cruz de Ferro, I was greatly disappointed. That looked more like a small dump on the edge of a road where cars were passing. It didn't match what I had imagined from the images I had seen. Indeed, it was a question of framing, because I myself took a low-angle photo that only showed the upper part of the hill, and within the image I captured some pilgrims who, with their backpacks and canes, looked like mountaineers reaching the summit of the peak. steep of a mountain. How true it is that you have to go to places yourself to see what they really are like.
I walked a few meters away to a hermitage there and sat on a step to observe. People were waiting their turn to be photographed next to the post with the cross. The truth is that I did not see anyone carry out the typical ritual of throwing a stone brought from home into the pile, thus symbolizing the purpose of getting rid of a heavy burden in life. Maybe it's because I didn't have to see any staging and it was done discreetly. In any case, it was a place that summoned emotions, I saw a woman cry on the shoulder of another. I noticed a girl who opened her backpack and scattered her things out of it, looking for something she apparently couldn't find. In the end, she began to write in her notebook, tore off the page and left it folded under some stones on the mound. She stood for a few moments, very still, and then she left.
I continued too because I was expecting a tough stage. Along some mountain trails I soon arrived at the Manjarín refuge, another of those famous places on the Camino. In an abandoned shepherd's village, Tomás, commander of the Knights Templar, opened a hostel for pilgrims in the 1990s. It's not just that they didn't have electricity, it's that they didn't have running water either, Toni had told me. Not even he had ever dared to spend the night here.
Among a motley accumulation of distance signs and worn-out multicolored flags, one entered a cabin that seemed to be on the verge of collapsing. Just as I entered I ran into Tomás, who was out with a dog for a walk. He wore a kind of white tunic with the red Templar cross on the chest, but on his head he wore a cap and not medieval chain mail as I had seen on the internet. Being an institution, I felt very lucky to have seen it in person.
Gregorian music was playing inside. The disorder and dirt were even greater than what could be sensed from the outside. There wasn't a single free space on the walls, it was all full of badges, photos and posters. There was also jewelry with Templar symbols, for sale by a man who regularly rang a small bell to summon the monks of a convent, but in this case it was to attract pilgrims. They had coffee in thermoses, in exchange for a donation, but I didn't see clean enough glasses. A pilgrim who was taking it asked the jewelry man if they had toilets, and he replied that, what is called "toilets", no, but that if he wanted to relieve himself there was a booth available on the other side of the road. where it said "Latrines." I waited a little, browsing around, and when the pilgrim came back, then it was me. And indeed that was like from other times: a little house made of boards among the bushes, and inside a floor boarded with a hole in the middle and its cover. They had written on it with a marker that once used it would close, thank you, just like if it were a toilet lid.
From Manjarín we followed mountain roads. At a certain moment, far below and still very far away, the hollow of the Bierzo region and the city of Ponferrada appeared. With this visual reference I realized that we were at a high altitude, it seemed to me that I could touch the sky with my hand. Here began a steep uninterrupted descent of about twelve kilometers that forced you to go without taking your eyes off the ground so as not to trip over the stones. It was very hard, with the backpack on our backs it was inevitable to overload our knees and legs.
Halfway down, in El Acebo, I had a portion of empanada for lunch with a beer. This little town was the opposite of Foncebadón, its magnificent views over Bierzo and the mountains had made it a tourist place with pedestrian streets, souvenir shops and balconies with flowers.
I continued descending to Molinaseca, where the slope ended, but there were still eight kilometers to Ponferrada. It was very hot. I wish I had gone to a restaurant where it was cool, to regain strength with a menu, calmly, drinking lots of water. Instead I stayed strong, wanting to finish and secure a place in the hostel, the same as always. And also, I met up with a girl who had spent the night at the Foncebadón hostel. At that moment she was leaving a pharmacy applying cream to her arms, which had been burned by the mountain sun. She had light blonde hair and very white skin, she looked Scandinavian.
"Hello," I greeted her.
"Hello, how are you?" he answered.
It left me confused, I didn't think she was Spanish.
—Yes, I am from Madrid, although my parents are Dutch.
Her name was Andrea and she was going fast, but I kept up with her. She told me that she had just finished her degree, she was a computer engineer, and that she had come to walk the Camino de Santiago to reflect on the future options that she had before her.
—And nothing, since I had twelve days available, what did I do? I looked at the stages and saw that I had time to do it from Astorga.
As soon as she decided, she went to the Decathlon closest to her house to get the basics, and in the afternoon she took a bus that left her in Astorga and the next day she was on her way.
"But I even forgot the sunscreen, and look, I've burned a lot, like a girl," he laughed.
In reality, the one who was burning out was me, because in the end I couldn't keep up with her and she left me behind, she was going too fast for me, cool as a lettuce (but for her it was only her second stage!).
I took revenge on a Japanese man whom I surpassed in the final stretch. He was a strange thing, that man, he looked quite old, almost an old man, and he had a long oriental wise goatee. And yet, on the way down the mountain, with his little backpack and two walking sticks, he had run ahead of me. When I saw him I couldn't believe it, I wondered why he didn't break his head, he must have been extremely focused. In any case, he wouldn't have enough strength, because his running style was sloppy and because now, at the gates of Ponferrada, I was the one leaving him behind. I saw him at a corner of the road, with his hands resting on his knees and his head forward, as if he were going to vomit. He was a wreck. I would at least get there, I told myself as I passed by him.
The Ponferrada hostel was a big one and, based on my experience over the last few days, that meant I wasn't going to socialize much. Better, because I didn't feel up to being with people. Or worse, because it was those same people who could lift my spirits. In any case, I was exhausted, and after shaving, showering, lotioning my feet, washing my clothes and hanging them up, I took a nap. And then it seemed to me that, since I was there, I should visit Ponferrada, its Templar Castle and the historic center. But it was quite unfortunate because I was dragging myself because I was still so tired. I didn't care much about all that. Although walking through the streets, I had the opportunity to witness a curious sight.
At first they seemed to me like perroflautas, two men with beards stationed on a pedestrian street, behind a dozing dog and a saucer for coins. But they neither played the flute nor were they beggars. On a sheet of paper as a poster, they indicated that they lived on the Camino and offered to have their credentials stamped, it was understood that in exchange for a donation. And indeed, they had pilgrim staffs and backpacks from which the scallop hung.
I passed them by, but at least I had the reflex to turn around and surreptitiously take a photo of them. Afterwards I very much regretted not having addressed them. What seal would they have? Why didn't I go over and throw them a coin? I could have asked them what they did, what “living on the Camino” meant in their case. I would have published it on the blog. My passivity or absent-mindedness may have been due to the fact that I lacked the necessary mental energy. He had lost it along with physics on the long walk that day.
That night at the hostel, I said goodbye to Pascual and Amparo. They had been doing the Camino in sections, twelve days ago they had resumed it in Burgos and now they interrupted it here, in Ponferrada, they were already tired.
—Actually it's because of Amparo.
"Yes, for this time it is enough that we are no longer of age," she said, who almost never spoke and when she did it was to cover for her husband.
The hard stage of that day had also taken its toll on them. Maybe they would return in spring, it would be to end up in Santiago, starting from here.
Pascual began to explain to me in detail the combination of the different means of transport they would take to return to their home in Valencia, a complete work of organizational art. I attended to him a little, but I had to interrupt him because my head couldn't take it anymore. I told them I was going to bed, to see if I could rest and be able to get up the next day.
"Well, we're saying goodbye now," Pascual said.
And he jumped on top of me to give me a big hug. And then Amparo. I then retreated to my bunk quickly, before my pregnancy became noticeable. She caught me off guard. I never would have thought I would miss them.



Ferro Cross. I have not seen anyone fulfilling the ritual of throwing a stone, brought from home, symbolizing that you are getting rid of a heavy burden in your life. The priority was rather to take the photo, for which you had to wait your turn. But I have seen people cry and the place is moving.



Ferro Cross. Seen this way, it looks like the tip of the Aizkorri massif. And yet, it is the same little mountain stuck on a stick in the other photo. Framing question. This was what I expected to find, perhaps because it is what others had shown me. Although it may disappoint, how good it is to go yourself and check the general plan.



Manjarín Refuge. There is no running water. The hospitalero is Tomás, also known for being a commander of the Order of the Temple. He plays Gregorian music and from time to time they ring a convent bell to attract the walker, since they sell Templar jewelry.



Descent towards Ponferrada, which is the urban center that can be seen in the background, down there. This descent has killed me. There are many kilometers downhill and the legs have to withstand a lot of pressure. But it is a very powerful feeling to have the sky so close.



They are not dog flutes, although at first glance they may seem that way. They are people who live on the Camino. They offer a stamp in exchange for a donation. I can only speculate about them because I haven't approached them to throw a coin at them and ask them. And now I regret not having done it.

22. Ponferrada — Villafranca del Bierzo (24.2 km)
At dawn, following the arrows to leave the city, I crossed a passage in the basement of a block of houses whose wall had graffiti that read "Compostilla", with the two "o's" replaced by scallop shells. It was funny to me, what silly humor, I thought, looking for the relationship there could be between a scab and Compostela. Later I came across the same word again, this time on a road sign. I took out my phone to search for it on Google and then I realized that "Compostilla" was the name of the neighborhood I had crossed.
We continued along a local road, leaving behind the last houses of Ponferrada and with them the public lighting. As it was getting light I didn't need to turn on the flashlight that I had strapped to my head, it was already visible. Soon I came to a fork in which there was no sign of the Camino like the ones that had guided me until now. I stopped looking for some other indication and then I heard a noise of branches very close, among the undergrowth that bordered the narrow road. It would be some bird. But suddenly, something jumped onto the road, an indefinite animal the size of a very thick and dark dog. He stood looking at me from about five meters away, his eyes shining. In that moment time was suspended, I was paralyzed with my senses grasping at their maximum and my head looking for a way out. I didn't feel any pilgrims coming from behind, but I had my cane to defend myself. On an unconscious impulse, I turned on the headlamp and saw it: a wild boar! He ran up the road (at high speed, hooves clicking on the asphalt) until he hid again in the undergrowth.
Frightened, but also enchanted by the beauty of this encounter with the wild and unpredictable, I waited just a minute for several pilgrims to catch up with me before continuing the march behind them. I immediately arrived at a town called Columbrianos and went into the first bar, one called Bar Pedrín. Upon entering, the waitress, behind the bar, wrinkled her eyes and protected them with her hand, telling me to please turn off the flashlight. She hadn't even realized that she was still wearing it. “Oysters,” I said to myself moments later, while I was drinking my coffee with milk, unable (or wanting) to get out of my head what had just happened to me out there.
From Ponferrada to Villafranca, the stage passed through the Bierzo region, a large valley surrounded by mountains. At first the valley was green and quite flat, and then hills covered with vineyards appeared. The landscape was Mediterranean, in line with the microclimate they enjoy in Bierzo, although the roofs of the houses were still made of slate and that reminded us of the proximity of the mountains.
I started to feel pain when I stepped. A lot. I stopped in a corner and took off my sneakers and socks. Sure enough, there they were: the blisters; I had rashes on both feet, on the edges and also on the soles, under the toes, which were what were making me see the stars. The steep descent to Ponferrada, plus the final race with the heat and my feet soaked in sweat, all of this had finally taken its toll on me. I remembered the bombardment of advice regarding the blisters that I received from Pascual in Mansilla de las Mulas, for the next few days I was going to regret not having listened to him. But when he gave them to me, I couldn't take what this man was telling me seriously, not after his shocking reaction to my swollen foot in Castrojeriz, which in the end turned out to be nothing.
I worked my butt off to get to Villafranca del Bierzo, and once there, I thought about going as always to the municipal shelter, which was the first at the entrance to the town. But Toni had recommended me the mythical Ave Fénix, a hostel with a long tradition on the Camino. He found me undecided. I looked for a shadow and took out my phone, ignoring my decision not to look at user comments on the internet. I found that the Ave Fénix had either very good or very bad reviews, depending on whether the atmosphere or comfort was valued more, respectively.
I decided to finally live the experience. Also, this is how Toni would greet a certain Juan who worked there. He stamped my credentials and took my details, a man in his fifties with a prominent belly and a gray mustache, who had a bandana printed with the Confederate flag tied in a pirate style. That man had something of Obélix and, as he seemed strange, I asked him if he was Juan by chance. No, he wasn't; Juan was around, he would appear soon. And no, it wasn't Mr. Jato, the famous owner of the hostel either.
The bedroom I had had an attic and was above the dining room. There were a lot of bunk beds pushed together. This was something that bothered me, having to sleep bed to bed with a stranger, but luckily I found one that was isolated. I spread my bag in it and, while I was taking things out of the backpack, suddenly, I found behind me a little girl of about two years old, in diapers, who was looking at me. To my bewilderment, she turned around and, staggering, returned to an adjoining room from which her mother was watching us, sitting on a mattress on the floor.
The hostel was a kind of reconstructed mansion that surrounded a central patio like an atrium. There was some unkempt vegetation in it and some people who were with a dog and a tent had camped right there, in a corner. There were advertising tables and chairs on the terrace. It was necessary to go out to this patio to access services that looked like a barracks: one of the compartments had a hole in the floor instead of a toilet and there were no doors, instead the cabins were protected by simple shower curtains.
It hurt just to put my foot on the ground, so after shaving, showering, applying cream, washing clothes and hanging them up, I decided that I wouldn't drag myself around Villafranca del Bierzo to do some painful sightseeing. In a bar around the corner I ate a tortilla and cane sandwich, and then I went back to the hostel to prick my blisters and rest lying in bed.
In the middle of the afternoon, I went out with my notebook to the patio and then the one with the Confederate scarf who looked like Obelix approached me and said: "Look, there you have Juan." He was a guy who was sitting on the terrace with a can of beer and smoking a cigarette. Maybe he was my age, although he was more worn out, with disheveled hair and beard and weather-beaten skin. Despite how hot it was, he was wearing a thick green army sweater. I approached him and gave him my regards from Toni. "Ah, yes," he told me, although later he would admit that it was impossible to remember all the people who passed by there. As soon as I told him where I was from, he invited me to sit with him and took two new cans of beer from the machine.
“I know Donosti very well,” he told me. I lived there for quite a few years.
He told me that he had been homeless since he was old enough to leave his native Badajoz. Between one thing and another, he ended up in San Sebastián and settled with his dog at gate twenty-three of the Anoeta football stadium. Until the social services put him in a hospitality assistant course, from which he came out with a job as a kitchen assistant in a well-known restaurant in the Old Town of San Sebastian.
—Shit, don't see how they screwed me at work, man, you little bastards.
From here, Juan began to explain to me the humiliations to which he was subjected in that job. When he told it to me, he became upset at times, I even got the impression that he was getting angry with me. "Those bastards screwed me over," he repeated over and over again, taking nervous drags on his cigarette and drinking from his can of beer while he told me about the grievances suffered, related to the contempt for his rights but above all the contempt for the person of him.
—Because I worked harder and better than anyone else. But they found out I was coming from the street and then they screwed me good. And I was subsidized and it didn't cost them anything, sons of bitches.
He lasted two years and ten months. He swore to me that she tried, but she had to leave. He couldn't even get himself fired to collect unemployment.
—And then I came to the Camino.
He began to wander around it like the wanderer he already was, staying here and there for a few days, for a while.
—The only good thing about all that was that I got my handler's license, and so, Jato, the boss here, rescued me for the Phoenix Kitchen. Do you want to check if what I told you is true, that I know how to work well?
I told him I didn't doubt it. But in any case I was going to confirm it because I had signed up for the community dinner, for which Juan was going to prepare us a Valencian paella. He got up and retreated to the kitchen to get to work, since, he said, doing it well took time.
A couple of hours later, in the Phoenix Ave's dining room with long tables and benches, about forty people squeezed in for dinner. Before starting with the salad, Jesús Jato, the boss, made us stand up and hold each other's hands forming a chain. He simply said that he was happy to have us there that night and that we arrived safely in Santiago. He then raised his clasped hands and shouted:
—Ultreia!
To which we all responded imitating him:
—ULTREIA!!
And followed:
—Suseia!
—SUSEIA!!
(Apparently, the greeting among pilgrims in the Middle Ages used to be this: “Ultreia” [“forward!”,” said one. “Et suseia” [“and beyond!”,” answered the other.)
At the table I was surrounded by Danish and German pilgrims who were delighted to stay in such an authentic hostel, the first that had been set up as such on the Camino de Santiago, according to their guides. I had also been reading in the afternoon on the Internet about the figure of Jesús Jato, a man who, as a child, had seen his grandmother hosting pilgrims in the block of her house and who, now, at almost eighty years old, continued to believe in all this, despite the fact that, in his opinion, so many hostels offering comforts were killing the spirit of the Camino. When reading this it occurred to me that, perhaps, the thing about the toilets with shower curtains was not neglect (or not only), but rather had some intention in line with the campaign spirit that predominated in the hostel. In a newspaper interview, Jato came to say the following:
The Camino is like life. You start it and you start having joys, pains, hardships, good times, bad times, everything. And you meet people. But there is something there that makes those encounters special, including the one you establish with yourself. Therefore it is a totally separate world.
Juan and Obélix confederate entered the dining room carrying the large paella pan between them. We all stood up applauding and taking photos as they tilted it to show it to us. Spectacular. And it was really good, an authentic Valencian paella on point. When we finished dinner I went to Juan to congratulate him. Until recently, all I knew about him was what he had told me, his words full of pain and anger towards those who had hurt him. But now he was addressing me to congratulate (to show my respect) to someone who dared to take on the responsibility of cooking (and in what way) for forty diners from all over the world. “Fantastic paella, Juan,” I told him. He thanked me. His eyes were wet, he looked happy.
At night we pilgrims retired to bed early, but in the dining room, which was just below the room, the hospitaleros and others continued to chat animatedly over their beers, among whom must have been the mother of the creature I had seen. before, since the little girl could be heard at times. While I was waiting to fall asleep, I was thinking about all that, about the Phoenix Bird understood as a place to take refuge. "I never thought that a price should be put on certain things," said Jato, referring to the spirit of the Camino, in the interview that he had read that afternoon.
From one of the bunks, a pilgrim pounded the wooden floor of the room to ask those below for silence. I thought I heard Juan laughing and coughing at the same time, while another of his group hissed asking them to lower their voices. It was the first time I found myself in a situation where it was the guests of an accommodation who called those in charge to order. I smiled inside my jacket. Indeed, that was priceless.



Spectacular paella at the Ave Fénix community dinner. If there is an authentic hostel on the Camino, it is the Ave Fénix. We have to go there. The opinions that clients leave about this hostel on the internet are usually very bad. Those of the pilgrims, very good.

23. Villafranca del Bierzo — La Faba (23.1 km)
It was cold in the morning, a temperature only in the single digits when I crossed the streets of Villafranca del Bierzo, still at night. It was Monday, but so early that no one who was not a pilgrim was there. After the town we continued along the shoulder of a road without traffic, next to the river in a closed valley, and I noticed how the humidity increased the feeling of cold. I remembered the raincoat I had abandoned in Hornillos to go lighter, telling me that he would see what to do when he needed to keep me warm.
Well, here's what I did that morning before leaving: I put on all the clothes I had with me. Double layer, both sweatpants and t-shirt. Walking clothing over strolling clothing. With that plus the jacket, and the backpack protecting my back, it wasn't bad at all. Also, in a couple of bars I composed myself by warming my numb hands with a cup of café con leche.
The temperature rose during the morning and the cold stopped being a concern to give way to the pain of the blisters and doubts about whether he would be able to finish the official stage in O Cebreiro, already in Galicia. The last section was "the greatest ascent of the Camino Francés in Spanish territory", according to the guide, and given that, I did not rule out shortening the route by staying in La Faba, a village halfway up the climb where there was a hostel run by Germans.
Towards Vega de Valcarce, a pilgrim who wanted to talk caught up with me. About fifty years old, his name was Kepa and he was from Bilbao. He had a powerful voice and a direct manner. When I told him that I was also Basque he was very happy (I didn't know how much I was going to disappoint him). He had just started the Camino the day before, in Ponferrada.
"My psychiatrist ordered it to be done," he added, fixing his gaze on me.
It shocked me that he told me like that, right off the bat. She gave me the impression that she expected me to ask her something about it, but I didn't. So she kept trying, telling me shreds of his personal wreckage, his divorce, the subsidy he didn't give her to live on, his children whom he barely saw. I listened to him but he didn't play along, he didn't even nod. And it's not that he slipped me, on the contrary, but that was too sudden, things weren't told that way. He continued telling me about the therapy group he attended, who were encouraging him on WhatsApp. They jokingly asked him if he was already praying.
"They tease me because I'm the most anti-religious thing you can say," he told me. But that's not why I'm doing the Camino de Santiago, I've come for mental health reasons. And you?
-Yes Yes, me too.
That's where the thing was. I stood beneath a magnificent highway viaduct that towered high above our heads. I told him that I was going to wait for a trailer to pass so that the photo I wanted to take of that bridge would look better, but Kepa stopped too, to wait with me.
—Do you know if there will be a pharmacy in this town? I have run out of Orfidal and need to buy.
He stared at me again, as if waiting for something of mine to happen to him. It was clear that she was not going to stop until she achieved my complicity.
There was a pharmacy. When we arrived I left him buying his anti-anxiety medication and told him that I was moving forward, that if that was the case we would see each other later.
I was definitely going to have to shorten the stage, because it wasn't going well. Upon arriving at Las Herrerías, the town where the climb to the mountain began, I stopped to have a beer. I knew I wasn't doing the right thing, since at the time it was a great relief to sit down, but then when I got up, the blisters hurt twice as much. What was going to be done to him? While I was having my beer, through the windows of the bar I saw Kepa passing by accompanied by another pilgrim. They were chatting as if they already knew each other, determined towards the end of the stage in O Cebreiro, and I thought that I would do well to stay in La Faba, with the Germans.
Curiously, as soon as the climb began I noticed that, since my worst blisters were under my fingers, due to a matter of load distribution, uphill was not as torturous as downhill. That's why I arrived at La Faba quite whole. And when I entered the hostel grounds, on the porch I instantly recognized the figure of Mahmud, whom I had not seen since that time I tried to keep up with him in Astorga. He was unmistakable in his yellow cotton T-shirt and vacationer shorts.
—Man, are you here? -say hi to.
I was bored because I had been waiting for a long time for the hostel to open.
—I preferred to stay here because my guide says that this place is one of the most beautiful on the Camino. And it certainly is.
I sat next to him on the bench to wait too. As an architect that he was (from the looks of him I would have said a doctor), he explained something to me about the beautiful church that we had in front of us. Mahmud was of Turkish Cypriot origin, a British colony in his time, although he had been sent to London to study as a child. But its origin only explained, at most, its great resistance to heat. That's why I went straight to the point.
—Excuse me Mahmud, but I would like to ask you a question, if you would be so kind: how come you walk so fast and agile?
I added jokingly that I seemed to see in him someone hiking through the English countryside, instead of doing the Camino de Santiago. He laughed.
—Indeed, I usually walk on weekends through the fields of Oxfordshire, where I live.
The hospital lady approached us at that moment with a tray on which she brought glasses and a pitcher of lemonade with ice cubes. The lemonade was made with real lemon, you could see the slices floating.
"Look, I'm going to tell you something," Mahmud continued.
And then he explained to me that when he was forty-five years old he decided to try running his first long race, a half marathon in London, and that afterward he continued practicing, becoming a regular marathon runner.
—But wasn't it a little late to start? —I asked her thinking about me, that she was about to turn forty-five years old.
—Maybe so, but understand me, I did it out of curiosity, I knew I had qualities and I wanted to see how far I would go, I never tried to compete.
But there was more. In April of that same year, he told me, at the age of seventy-two, he had participated in the Atlas Ultramarathon (Ultra Trail Atlas) in Morocco, a race equivalent to six marathons held in six consecutive days, walking and running alternately through mountains. rocky and desert areas, carrying your food and drink in your backpack. And he had finished it.
—At seventy-two years old?!
The old Japanese man with the goatee of an oriental sage who ran down the mountain towards Ponferrada came to mind.
—Seventy-two then, yes. "Now I'm seventy-three," she said. And after a pause in which she drained her glass of lemonade, he added—: You will understand then, my friend, that doing the Camino is for me like going for a walk.
A German association of friends of the Camino de Santiago was in charge of the hostel in the small village of La Faba, because the facilities had been restored with the money of a rich benefactor from that country, as it was stated on a plaque. The hospitaleros who were covering the shift at that time were a retired couple from Frankfurt who came to spend three weeks (it was their third consecutive year there). The man's name was Frank, and while I was chatting with Mahmud he was passing the broom across the porch, while his wife, Daniela, walked around making sure everything was in order and serving lemonade to the pilgrims who were arriving.
The place was magnificent; It was made up of a large house that was the hostel itself, a small church inside which classical music played at a very low volume, and a garden area between the two. The complex was surrounded by a low wall and trees that provided shade. In the middle there was a bronze sculpture of a medieval pilgrim, and next to it a fountain from which a stream of water flowed and where you could soak your feet.
When two o'clock struck, Frank stood at a table on the porch with the registration book and the seal, and began to admit the pilgrims in strict order of arrival. When it was my turn, he spoke to me in Spanish, I knew it well enough, he said he was learning. He was meticulous with the information and rules to follow at the hostel. Afterwards, Daniela accompanied me inside to assign me the bunk and show me around. Everything was perfect, very clean (there was hand soap and towels in the bathrooms!).
There was no community dinner, there was a small shop in the village where we could buy food. Neither Frank nor Daniela were those who enjoyed group socialization, they were too reserved for joint reflections made in a circle and lighted candles passed to each other, although on an individual level they took a great interest in their guests. I was grateful, because that was a good place to rest calmly before entering the supposedly overcrowded final stretch of the Camino in Galicia.
The surroundings and calm encouraged conversation with other pilgrims. In the afternoon I sat outside on one of the benches. There were two women with Asian features who said they were Filipino.
"Well, I'm from the town where Miguel López de Legazpi was born," I told them without adding any more information, convinced that this would awaken a special interest in them.
"Yes, we know who he was, we studied him in school," said one of them, named Gilda, in a tone that seemed indifferent to me. Good guy, huh?
I had the vague notion that, without having been a piece of bread, López de Legazpi (conqueror of the Philippines and founder of Manila) was, at least historically, a figure worthy of consideration. Although it was also true that no Filipino tourist was ever seen in Zumarraga visiting his birthplace. And, in fact, according to them, Spanish had not caught on in the Philippines. The other girl, named Imelda, said that, since she was a little older than Gilda, as a child she had had to study Spanish at school, but that she had forgotten everything.
"Although there are words that were left over from Spanish in the dialect, like "table" or "chair," said Gilda, referring to the table and chair in front of her.
"Hey," Imelda asked me, changing the subject, "and being Spanish, how do you feel doing the Camino and being in your country at the same time?"
—Well, I suppose it's more comfortable for me than for you, although the truth is, during the last few weeks I have disconnected from everything and I feel more identified with pilgrims like you than with the Spaniards who are not part of this.
"Because you're a real pilgrim," said Frank, who had come to sit with us. Groups of noisy Spaniards pass through here, pretending to be pilgrims but they are nothing more than tourists who take advantage of our volunteer work.
He was absolutely right, although I couldn't help but smile when I saw in him a responsible German complaining about Spanish impudence, a cliché that was repeated. It occurred to me that the same would happen with the natives of any other country, should the Camino pass through it. We continued chatting to the background sound of water falling into the fountain. It was true, I had not said it just to ingratiate myself with those who accompanied me: truly, I felt as if I were part of that, of a floating country called the Camino de Santiago.



The Germans' hostel in La Faba is a wonderful place. Although it sounds clichéd by the hosts, it is true: everything is in order. And calm. On the right is the church, and next to it the German retired couple receiving pilgrims. To the left is the porch of the hostel, on whose benches and chairs you sit and chat.
Galicia

24. La Faba — Triacastela (25.5 km)
Despite the cold of the morning, the hosts of the La Faba hostel, Frank and Daniela, came out to the porch to say goodbye to the pilgrims. Shaking our hands, they wished us all “buen Camino” and thanked them for their hospitality. Then Daniela, with the satisfaction and tranquility of having fulfilled her duty, even allowed herself a small relaxation with her guests.
"I have a question for you," he told me.
Wow, what will it be?
And like a mother, she asked me if I had the documentation, the credential, the cell phone, the cane, the backpack with me... Yes to everything.
"Then you can go," and she tapped me on the shoulder and began to laugh herself as I had never seen her do until then.
I still couldn't know it, but it turned out that La Faba was the last of the hostels with volunteer hospitaleros in which I stayed, in Galicia nothing was going to be the same in this sense.
The day began to dawn, once again the clear sky was going to allow me to see the sunrise. It was convenient to have some natural light from the beginning of the climb, because the path was rocky. On the sides you could see cows grazing and I was eager to enter Galicia, to see "Galicia" written on some sign. Since my blisters didn't hurt yet, I enjoyed the climb and in an hour and a half I was at the top of the mountain, in O Cebreiro, a Celtic stone and slate village that I thought was too rebuilt and set up for tourists.
O Cebreiro was an emblematic place on the Camino, but the truth is that I did not pay much attention to its church or the treasures it contained. He was more interested in regaining his strength with a helping of tortilla and coffee with milk. While he was having breakfast, a group of bricklayers entered the bar and stood around the bar, all wearing caps and dressed in identical blue overalls. They would be working on some nearby construction site and came to pour coffee. They spoke in Galician, a very closed Galician. Definitely, I was in Galicia.
A rural Galicia, that of the lost villages of Lugo. Because even though O Cebreiro was touristy, the rest of the towns I passed through that day did not seem that way to me, although none of them lacked establishments for pilgrims. But the few villagers that were seen were dedicated to livestock: the towns smelled like stables and their streets were marked by splashes of manure from the cows that had passed by on their way to the pasture (it was almost impossible not to step on something). The men were in their inevitable blue overalls and the women were in robes, both with katiuskas. The only thing missing was the rain, the moss that invaded the stone walls must have been missing it.
I don't know if it was the heat, the accumulated kilometers, the slope down towards Triacastela or all of this together, but the fact is that the damn blisters started to hurt again. What amazed me was the contrast between how much they made me suffer and the immediacy with which they stopped: all I had to do was sit on the terrace of a bar and take off my shoes to notice instant relief. But then continuing was torture, my feet became angry.
I came across a very old man who was walking, moving laboriously forward in very short steps with the help of a cane. I identified with him and was about to wish him a "buen Camino!", but at the last moment I realized that he was an old man and my greeting might sound like a joke.
There was, however, something new that helped with spirits: the official milestones that in Galicia mark the Camino. They appeared frequently and carried a plaque with the distance to Santiago (in meters!), so whenever I left one behind, I was glad that there was less left.
Between how slow I was going and the repeated stops to refuel, I was practically alone and finished the stage very late, around four in the afternoon. I was so sore that I didn't even worry about whether or not there would be room in the hostel, I simply addressed the public of the Xunta de Galicia, which was the first thing one encountered when arriving in Triacastela. It turns out that there were plenty of free places.
The shelter was made up of two barracks with large windows, located next to a grassy esplanade. It was from the time of Xacobeo 93, the first Jubilee Year that Manuel Fraga promoted with great fanfare to boost tourism in Galicia. In this and other hostels built at that time, the investment made and the desire to provide modern infrastructure to the Camino de Santiago could be seen. The Triacastela hostel opened that same year, 1993, and at first glance it might have seemed pretty, although it had become a bit outdated. And furthermore, it was not very welcoming due to its aesthetic rather than functional design and lack of maintenance.
Later I found out that many people preferred private hostels because for a few euros more they provided you with other amenities (having, for example, kitchen utensils, because the Xunta hostels had a kitchen but nothing else, no pots or cutlery). . So for reasons like these there were no space problems, and when I arrived, the manager assigned me a bunk in a small cabin with a swing door. I shaved, showered, creamed my feet, washed my clothes and hung them up, and between one thing and another I got to know my roommates, a young Italian couple and Paula, a German girl.
I went to the pharmacy in Triacastela, which was called La Botica del Peregrino. As in Frómista, I was convinced that they would give me good advice there, because they must necessarily be specialists in foot ailments. When she showed the vials, the pharmacist didn't think what she had was serious. He recommended some Compeed brand dressings, strips that, he told me, would protect the area, promote the reabsorption of fluid and alleviate the pain. There was no need to take them off, he warned me, they would fall off by themselves a few days after fulfilling their function.
Ready. I felt happy, the problem was on the way to being solved. I decided to go back to the hostel to rest for a while. I walked like I was stepping on eggs, very aware of every step I took because it hurt a lot even with my walking sandals, it must have been a bit painful. On the way I noticed a very old billboard, with a rusty structure and a discolored background. But even though it was faded, what had caught my attention in it had been the unmistakable figure of Pelegrín, the popular mascot who served as the logo of Xacobeo 93. Pelegrín! How can I forget, a character who was once It became as familiar to us as Cobi or Curro.
When I arrived at the esplanade in front of the hostel, I noticed that half a dozen young people in their twenties had been sitting in a circle on the grass around Dante, the Argentine who was Marta's son and who happened to play the guitar. There were, among others, the Italian couple from my room, the Belgian girl from Foncebadón who was with her mother, and Andrea, the Guiri from Madrid. The girls seemed delighted with the music and the Argentine's seductive style. The scene had something like a university campus or youth hostel. I stood looking at them from a little distance and I realized the distance that separated me from them: those boys and girls were the same age as Pelegrín, they must have been born twenty-five years ago. The day before yesterday. And I thought without envy that the world of young people with a desire for fun was also a world that existed within the Camino and that was already far away for me.
I had dinner at a very good looking place called Complexo Xacobeo (it was also a hostel and hostel for pilgrims, hence the "complex"). At the Triacastela hostel I had realized that I would have no way to recharge my cell phone at night (there were outlets in the room, but they didn't work), so upon entering the restaurant I asked the waiter if he could put me at a table with a plug nearby.
"Anyone," he told me without stopping because he was so busy.
Like anyone? I didn't see any shots on the free tables there.
But he soon appeared again and gave me an external battery to charge my cell phone. He wore a sticker that read: «Xacobeo Complex. Don't forget to return it. Thank you". When preparing the table for me, he placed a paper as a tablecloth that contained all the information (map included) for the next day's stage between Triacastela and Sarria. This really was a pilgrim-oriented restaurant.
I ordered Galician broth and stewed tongue. I was drinking the broth when behind me I heard the sharp thud of a bottle tipping over on the table and then the liquid pouring onto the floor like a waterfall. The smell of wine came to me.
—Oh my god! —I heard someone say behind me, in a hurry—. Oh my god! —Oh my God, he repeated at a low volume, saying it to himself. It was the unmistakable voice and accent of an Asian, perhaps a Korean. My mistake, oh my god!
That "my mistake", meaning "my fault", was what made me feel very sorry for him. Because furthermore, it was most likely that a moment before he was enjoying the happiness of a delicious dinner enlivened by wine. And now he had ruined everything.
I could have turned to offer my help, to at least show my understanding. But I did not. I followed the scene with my back to it, without turning around once. The Asian remained in his place, waiting for the waiter's arrival like a child waits for an adult after committing a mischief.
But the waiter did not come because he was serving other tables. A couple of customers who were dining in front of me noticed the disaster and, pointing to my neighbor, said to the waiter:
—Paco, come closer to that guy over there, it seems like he's messed you up.
Paco looked annoyed. Moments later a woman came with a bucket and a mop and Paco himself followed behind, with a new bottle of wine.
"No, no, no, no," said the Korean. “My mistake, my mistake,” he repeated.
He didn't want his wine refilled. She said she was done, asked for the bill and left. He must have passed in front of me, but I didn't notice him.
For dessert I ordered a fruit salad that was served on a scallop-shaped plate. With the first spoonful I felt a stomach cramp. I didn't want to give it importance, it would pass. But the acute stomach pain persisted and I couldn't even move. I was scared because I might have to ask for help and I didn't know anyone there. After a few endless minutes, finally, little by little, it began to subside. I got up to pay, leaving the fruit salad intact on the table. I arrived at the hostel a little dizzy, but as soon as I went to the bathroom everything went back to normal and I forgot what happened.



The Complexo scallop-shaped. And they treat you well, although we pilgrims, in principle, are only passing customers.
25. Triacastela — Sarria (17.8 km)
I left the Triacastela hostel and went to the Complexo Xacobeo for breakfast. There I met David, a man from Alicante about my age who I had been meeting lately in public shelters, although we had never spoken yet. He invited me to join him at the table, along with the coffee he was nibbling on toast with tomato and oil.
"Hey, haven't you by chance seen a rather elderly Japanese man carrying two canes?" he asked me.
—One with a goatee, who runs?
-Yes, that.
—He passed me down the mountain towards Ponferrada, but I only saw him at that stage, why?
—I'm looking for him to give me back my cane.
He explained to me what had happened to him. That man arrived around four in the afternoon at the room in the Ponferrada hostel where David had settled. He seemed devastated. Without introducing himself to anyone or taking a shower, he went straight to bed.
—And at night, at four in the morning, he goes and rings his alarm, nano, waking us all up. The guy gets up, gets ready in the dark and leaves. And when I go to get my poles later, I find that I am missing one. I ask the others and it turns out that the one that is left there without an owner is a black one, which looks like mine but it is surely the Japanese one, who, given how quiet he was, I am sure he got confused and took mine.
David appropriated it and was now walking with the unpaired sticks, looking for the Japanese to recover his. I remembered the face of concentration that that man wore as he descended the dangerous mountain path. This must have been the problem with going to the limit in a challenge like this: along with the physical effort, the concentration required to not hit it left you exhausted, without the energy to pay attention to the rest of the things.
Upon leaving Triacastela you could continue through the San Xil valley or through the monastery of Samos. The guide said that both routes were beautiful, but through Samos it was 7.2 kilometers longer and, with my blisters, I was not up for much joy, so I turned to the right through San Xil and David, in better physical shape than I Even though he also came from afar (he had started in Roncesvalles), he went through Samos.
And indeed, the stage passed through natural environments in which oak forests predominated. In many sections the road was at a lower level with respect to the surrounding land, these were the so-called congostras or corredoiras, very common in Galicia. There were several factors that apparently had led to the erosion and subsequent formation of these paths, but it was nice to think about the contribution made by the steps of walkers over time. When these corridors were downhill, and if they also twisted, then it seemed like you were going down a slide, and if it hadn't been for the impediment and the blisters, I might have been encouraged to raise my arms like a pair of wings to start running uphill. down and enjoy, and who knows whether to break my head.
Upon reaching the Sarria expansion, I had the impression of entering a Pyrenean town near a ski resort, through the slate roofs of some apartment blocks built here and there, among open fields. I suppose that the abundance of hotels and accommodation options that I was seeing also contributed to that feeling, proof that many people passed through Sarria, including those who began their pilgrimage here to travel at least the last hundred kilometers to Santiago.
On the way I found a tourist office and I went in to clarify a matter that had been worrying me. I had heard that from Sarria it was necessary to have your credential stamped at least twice a day, so that in Santiago you could prove that you had completed at least this last stretch on foot and in this way they would give you the Compostela, the diploma that accredited your pilgrimage. People normally collected stamps, they had their credentials stamped in accommodations, churches and emblematic places, and also in bars and beach bars. I, however, preferred to keep my "accordion" (as some called it, because of its folds) with only one daily stamp, that of the hostel.
The girl at the tourist office told me that, indeed, the double stamp was necessary for those who traveled only the last hundred kilometers, but that it was not clear to her in the case of long-distance pilgrims. She called to ask and they told her that when in doubt, she should seal twice a day, what was the problem? "In any bar they stamp it for you," she told me. Yes, yes, but I valued my credential very much as proof of my long trip and I wanted it with stamps that were meaningful to me, those of my time in the hostels where I had spent the night, and not with those of any bar where I had stayed. taken a coke.
Without clarifying it, I arrived at the Sarria hostel, belonging to the Xunta, like all public hostels in Galicia. It was located in a house in the old part of the city. At reception I found a lady with her glasses resting on the tip of her nose, with cords hanging on either side of her, waiting sitting inside a glass doorman's booth. There didn't seem to be much movement of pilgrims. I approached the window and gave him my ID and her credentials. I noticed some photo frames that she had on the table, I imagined that they would contain portraits of her children. He spread my credential anywhere and, smearing the seal in ink, I suddenly realized that he was preparing to mechanically stamp it in the first free box he saw.
—NOOOOOO!! NOT THERE! —I shouted.
Too late, the only thing I managed to do was mitigate the force with which he imposed the seal a little. The damage was already done: I had broken the linearity that I had scrupulously followed until then, each stamp of the day adjacent to the previous one. I could'nt believe it. Didn't this woman know that for a pilgrim there was nothing more sacred than her credential?
I told him to put it back on, this time pointing him to the right place. Regarding the smudge, maybe I could fix it with an eraser. When the registration process was finished, I asked him about the need for double stamping starting in Sarria for someone like me, with a credential with as many stamps as I had.
"I don't know," she told me, as if it wasn't her.
—But don't you think that coming from far away it's not necessary?
-No idea.
"And wouldn't you be interested in knowing, in case someone else asks?" he would have gladly asked. But I didn't dare. She stared at me blankly over his glasses, like someone looking at an object. It didn't even seem like he was going to show me where the rooms were.
—And could you please tell me where the rooms are?
"Up the stairs," he said without flinching.
He had never visited Sarria before and yet it was as if he had been a lifelong resident there. When I went out to the balcony of the hostel to hang out the clothes, just at that moment the Belgian girl and her mother were passing by on the street, and greeting us loudly, they told me that they were staying in a nearby hostel. When I later went for a walk through the old town, empty at that hour, I suddenly heard people shouting at me and calling me by name. I looked up and saw the Filipino girls from La Faba, who were waving at me from the window of her hostel. Later I went to the drugstore to buy shampoo, which I had run out of, and there was the Italian who in San Martín prepared the magnificent salad for us. In the supermarket where I bought a pre-cooked meal for dinner, there were pilgrims whom I greeted in the aisles. All this had its uncomfortable part, since it was like being in my town, constantly waiting to greet everyone. But on the other hand, there I also found the comforting feeling of being part of a tribe.
When I returned with the shopping to the hostel, I met up with Isidro and David. There were no longer so many unconditional fans of the public, although they were also beginning to get angry with these people from the Xunta. There was no kitchen, only a microwave, but they managed well by serving the serrano ham, chorizo ​​and wine. That night, in the dining room, I had dinner accompanied by them and the anecdotes they told.
Isidro, the elderly man from Murcia who got angry in Foncebadón because everything was in English and we were in Spain, was a good snorer, but he said that he wasn't sleeping well in the hostels either. He said that the other day he fell asleep happily in O Cebreiro, until something woke him up.
—And then I open my eyes and I go and find the screen of a cell phone that was shining its light all over my face.
“Yes, yes,” said David, “I was there, it was a Korean who couldn't sleep because of snoring and he started looking for the snorer by shining his cell phone through the bunk beds.
Isidro, despite opening his eyes, remained half asleep and thought someone was showing him the screen so he could read something on it, but he didn't understand what it said because those looked like Chinese letters. Until waking up completely, he saw the Chinese man on top of him and realized what was happening.
"Come on, get out of here and put on earplugs," he then said, "it doesn't bother you."



Between Triacastela and Sarria there are sections in which the road is at a lower level compared to the land that surrounds it. They are common in Galicia and are called congostras or corredoiras. It is nice to think that they were formed by erosion with the footsteps of walkers over time. When they are downhill and the path winds, it seems like you are going down a slide.

26. Sarria — Portomarín (22.2 km)
I left the hostel and immediately went to have breakfast in one of the establishments along the Camino, in the old town of Sarria. I ordered coffee with milk and Galician bread toast and sat down. Shortly after, a blonde pilgrim with her hair in a ponytail approached me at the table and spoke to me, but so quietly that I didn't understand her at first. That she could sit there, that the other tables were occupied.
-Yes of course.
He was drinking tea without milk and was holding the cup with both hands, as if to warm them. At those early hours I didn't really want to start a conversation with anyone, but she seemed polite. She told me that she was Swedish and she asked me something, but again I couldn't hear her well because of the noise in the bar.
-Hey?? —I shouted very loudly, to make him understand, annoyed that he did not deign to speak to me a little louder.
That from where he had been doing the Camino, he was quick to repeat, but without raising his tone this time either. If I understood him it was because I pricked up my ears and focused on his expression, which was delicate. She had a porcelain-white complexion and I got the feeling that she might break if she strained her fine voice. I had undoubtedly disturbed her with my abrupt way of addressing her, her timid little eyes barely daring to look at me. I thought that it's not like I had to be a lynx to guess what she was asking me, since they were the typical questions that were asked among pilgrims.
"From my house," I told him, explaining where that was and softening the deal as much as I could. I saw myself reflected in her, I felt guilty. And you?
—From Saint Jean.
It seemed surprising to me that that fragile being was doing the entire French Way. I assumed that he had been walking for at least a month, like me.
"No, I've been there for thirteen days," he told me.
Hey? It was half the time I had taken, and that meant that I had been doing stages of forty kilometers or more. That didn't fit me. Then she got up from her chair and walked to the bar to pay for her tea and leave. I saw that he had enormous legs, wrapped in black tights, his thighs were like those of a velociraptor, of a disproportionate size with respect to his body. Picking up her things, she moved nervously, as if she couldn't control the impulse of her motor, like a restless horse about to trot. When she saw her leave, I thought about the unequal development that people can have in different aspects of ourselves. That there were things that perhaps could be trained based on determination and strength, to build muscle and run in life, although the confidence necessary to navigate it well, that could no longer be molded in the same way.
It was clearly noticeable that there were more people circulating on the Camino, there was more atmosphere. Near the milestone that indicated the last hundred kilometers to Santiago, I met Kepa again, from Bilbao. At a certain distance I could already hear him coming from behind with his loud voice, he continued talking a lot and on this occasion he shared his talk with some young people who were in a group, one of whom was wearing the red and white striped shirt of Athletic Bilbao. As I passed by, Kepa addressed me very politely, he looked happy and rejuvenated, he was wearing a scarf tied on his head in a pirate style.
—Wow, how are you? —She asked me in Basque.
I told him fine. She looked at me in disbelief. I think I felt a little sorry for him seeing me so alone.
-Do you want to come with us? He proposed to me. We're having a great time.
"No, thank you, I prefer to go at my own pace," I answered.
I was glad he had found his people.
A little further on, while I was crossing an oak forest, a faint sound of bagpipes began to surround me, a music that came from afar and to which I initially did not pay much attention. But as it didn't stop and kept increasing in volume, it finally became clear to me and I thought about it: I assumed that I was going to some establishment with folk music on full blast to attract customers. In the end, it turned out that it was a real bagpiper (with his typical clothes) who was playing the bagpipes in the middle of the forest in exchange for a donation, he had not fallen into that possibility.
I reached the milestone of the last hundred kilometers. It was completely defaced, there was no room for a single inscription. Whoever left his mark there knew of the projection it was going to have throughout the world, I took a photo of it myself.
The blisters started to bother me towards the end of the stage, it didn't seem to me that those dressings were working at all, it was going very tight. Even so, I caught up with a group of Koreans that included the couple I had been greeting intermittently from none other than the Hornillos hostel, in Burgos. He had met them on that occasion when he was having dinner with Toni in the dining room full of Asians, including Emika and Shan Lee (he had lost sight of them a long time ago). The man was the one with the rice ball with seaweed, which he wrapped in plastic wrap for breakfast the next day.
Since then we had greeted each other, although I had hardly spoken to him and I didn't even know his name. His English was very bad, but that didn't stop him from being a nice guy who was always in a good mood (he had seen him with good mugs of beer and emptying bottles of red wine, it must be said). And I had to see how he addressed me, especially when I hadn't seen him in days and I was already beginning to forget about him. A couple of stages earlier, on a terrace in Triacastela, he saw me from afar and shouted at me as he got up from his chair and held his jug up to me.
That Korean was cool. I confirmed it once again when I accompanied him along with his wife and the rest of his group in the final stretch of the stage. The descent to the bridge that crossed the Miño River reservoir could be done by two different paths: one was easy but boring; the other was pretty but demanding. We all knew where to go. When the man saw that my choice coincided with his, he began to laugh out loud when he realized that they were not the only ones who were up for little nonsense at that point on the Camino.
And when we crossed the bridge, when we came across the steep stairs that Portomarín makes pilgrims climb as a welcome, then he started pissing with laughter and, raising his arms, he stood with his back to them and asked for Please have a photo taken so that there is evidence of that joke they played on us.
The stairs were there to ascend to a town completely rebuilt on the hillside, since its original location, on the banks of the river, had been flooded by the waters of the reservoir inaugurated by Francisco Franco in 1963. And the stones with which they had built them came from the missing medieval bridge that once allowed pilgrims to cross the Miño and enter the original Portomarín. So, looking at it like that, it made some sense that they made us climb all those steps, to continue the tradition.
The Koreans went to a hostel where they could prepare food and I went to the public of the Xunta, to continue with my custom. The urban planning of Portomarín had something artificial because the entire town had been built at the same time and with the same pattern. For this reason, among the identical and semi-new houses, the robust Romanesque church that had been moved there, stone by stone, stood out. Nearby, on Camilo José Cela Street, was the hostel, a very apparent construction with a Pelegrín-shaped monolith in front and a plaque at the reception remembering its inauguration in 93 by Don Manuel Fraga Iribarne.
Inside, the same trend as in recent days: there were laundry rooms but not simple plastic basins in which to soak clothes so that the hand washing soap could take effect; The clotheslines were insufficient, the ropes that hung in the patio were each from his father and his mother, it was obvious that they had been put there by passing pilgrims; There were plugs but not a single extension cord with a multiple socket so that we could all recharge our cell phones quietly without getting hit by them. Those details (the lack of detail) irritated me; I decided not to wash more than the basics and went out indignantly to the street to have a drink in a bar and take the opportunity to recharge my phone in the meantime.
At night, my intention was to dine on what I had bought at the supermarket accompanied by Isidro and David and their anecdotes, just as I had done so comfortably in Sarria the day before. When I arrived with my bag, in the hostel dining room there were more people sharing a table with them. They were all Spanish and had just started the Camino de Santiago to cover the minimum of the last hundred kilometers. From the animated conversation and jokes they shared, I immediately understood that they had spent the afternoon together. The new ones were two middle-aged men and two slightly older men, and they came from different Spanish regions.
I had dinner with them and they offered me some of the wine they were sharing. But I didn't open my mouth (neither to drink nor to speak) because the laughter was getting louder and it turned into a "let's see who calls it the biggest one." They were talking about the massage service they offered to pilgrims at a reasonable price somewhere in Portomarín and to which David, with muscle pain, had decided to go that afternoon.
—And has there been a “happy ending” or not? —one asked him, laughing.
—Well, I wouldn't say no, nano, because after so many days, you miss that massage more than the other one.
—But was there then?
—No, damn it! I already told you before that it was a man who gave it...
-And what does that have to do with anything? —another, who was eating some pre-cooked oriental noodles, jumped out and stuck out his tongue to smack his lips obscenely, while putting the cardboard cup in front of him with the product brand: Yatekomo.
Explosion of laughter.
"Damn, with the amount of Chinese girls there are around here," said a third, ostensibly looking at the butts of Imelda and Gilda, who had just passed by without understanding what all the fuss was about.
The moment the Filipinos left the dining room, they turned around and caught me laughing shamelessly along with the group of Spaniards. After that I no longer dared to speak to them.



This Korean (although he looks like a Japanese from World War II) is cool, he's always laughing. He even laughs at the stairs that you have to climb as a welcome to enter Portomarín, the end of the stage.
27. Portomarín — Palas de Rei (24.8 km)
The road became increasingly crowded, sometimes even crowds of large groups and associations formed whose members all wore the same distinctive t-shirt or scarf tied around their necks. Consequently, people greeted each other less, they no longer heard the “buen Camino!”, not only because it would have been cumbersome to repeat it like a parrot at every step, but because it no longer seemed to make sense in the more normalized environment in which one was. converting that.
It was more than mid-morning when I noticed a pilgrim who had gone off the path to sit on the grass in a spot with a view. As I passed by her I saw that the girl was reading a book. Although her back was turned to me, I recognized her as Paula, the young German woman I had met two days before at the Triacastela hostel. I called out to greet her and she turned around.
"You're doing well," I told him. It's the first time I've seen something like this when I've been traveling.
I found that scene unusual in which a pilgrim takes his time on the side of the road to read quietly while enjoying the landscape.
"I'm waiting for all the people to pass by," he answered.
Paula had already told me that she never planned. The end of his stage was marked by his desire to stop and call it a day. He would go as far as he could and then he would look for a shelter, and if there was no place he would look for another one without caring about walking further until he found a free place where he would play.
In Triacastela, when she introduced us to the room, she said she was from Kassel: "Ah, yes, where he documents it," I told her to impress her. “Do you know him?” she asked me, surprised. No, she had only read a novel (Kassel does not invite logic, by Enrique Vila-Matas) about this contemporary art event that was being held in her city.
It was clear that she was a girl who went her own way. That afternoon, while the young pilgrims gathered in the field in front of the hostel around a guitar, she was picking small, rock-hard apples from some wild apple trees there. I was sitting on a bench, focused on my phone, when she came to offer me some. "They're good," she exclaimed as she sat next to me eating them.
I was running out of battery and in that Xunta hostel it was a problem because the outlets didn't work. That didn't affect Paula because she didn't have a cell phone, she had left it in Germany, turned off. "And the photos? "Don't you take photos?" I asked him without quite believing it. "No, I don't take photos." She did call her family from time to time to tell them that she was fine, and that was enough.
The next morning, while the rest of us were gathering our things to leave early, Paula was still stuck in her sleeping bag. Shortly after, before leaving the room, I looked towards her bed and saw that she was already awake: without leaving her sleeping bag, reclining on the bunk bed, she was having cereal and milk for breakfast in an aluminum bowl. I wished him a good Camino. “Do you know where I can find deserts in Spain?” she asked me then. I told him that I didn't know exactly, but that apart from those on the plateau, I would surely find them in the south. "That's what I plan to do, when I get to Santiago I'm going to go down to Seville along the Vía de la Plata," she told me. I visualized it for a moment. "But wouldn't that be complicated, going in the opposite direction, looking for the arrows looking backwards, interpreting them backwards?" She seemed to consider it. "No, what's wrong," she said after a moment, smiling, "why would it be?"
Now, two days later, I found her again, this time reading a book on the side of the road in that place with a view. I didn't want to bother her and said goodbye to her for the second (and last) time. And just a few feet later, I realized that she had just missed the opportunity to take a photo of herself. I could have taken it, since my back was turned and it wouldn't have bothered her, who also didn't do them. It would have been very good for her blog, to accompany her story. I was very sorry, so much so that it crossed my mind to retrace my steps to portray her, but I noticed that something very strong prevented me from doing so. It wasn't just the blisters (which were already giving me trouble again), the weight of the backpack or having to walk the Camino against the current, even if it was only in a small section. No, it was something more decisive that was related to the unique opportunity that one unexpectedly presents at a certain moment and misses it by not being attentive. I began to reproach myself, but then I remembered that I would always have the resource of writing as a way of portraying Paula after the fact.
The stage was getting complicated for me because of the blisters that, from bothering me as they had in the last two days, began to torment me as much or more than when I arrived in Triacastela, three stages ago. The dressings from the pharmacy were not doing their job because under them, on the soles of my feet, I could feel the blisters raging. I was overwhelmed, not paying attention to anything except the overwhelm that was obfuscating me. I asked myself if I could get something out of it, extract some teaching related to suffering, I don't know, what I was experiencing sounded like penance to me and maybe I could pay attention to the pain I felt, accompany it and accept it to verify that despite the torture I was able to move forward, things like that.
Nonsense, that was not an induced psychological discomfort, but a full-blown ordeal that only served to distance me from everything and everyone, starting with myself. I neither knew nor cared where I was going. I was only an entity at the service of that torture, I had no resources left for anything else and the only thing I wanted was to get to the shelter and for it all to be over. I only recovered when I stopped at the bars and then I understood that, at most, that cross helped me to enjoy more those truces in which I was accompanied by coffees with milk, tortilla skewers and beers that tasted like blessed glory. I understood that the time had come to rest for a whole day because it seemed to me that it would be impossible to continue the next.
I finally managed to reach Palas de Rei and headed as always to the public hostel, located in the center of the town. It had the same shortcomings as the previous ones, with the addition that in this one the facilities were even older, it wasn't even pretty. I didn't care. After shaving, showering, applying (as best I could) foot cream, washing clothes and hanging them, I sat down to rest outside, on a bench next to the entrance door to the hostel.
I took my feet out of the sandals to give them air. They looked like a mess because the dressings were half falling off and that made them look horrible. The adhesive strips had gotten caught on my socks and as I took them off at each stop that day, I had ended up partially peeling them off my skin. The water from the shower had definitely left them without their total adhesive power, making it look like they were wearing rags hanging from their feet. And to top it all off, the dressings were a flesh-cream color, so it was not surprising that a pilgrim was scared when, passing by me, she looked at my feet and thought that the flesh was falling off in chunks, like a leper or a pilgrim with gangrenous feet from the fire of Saint Anthony.
I finished ripping off the dressings completely, and then I went to the pharmacy closest to the hostel. Even while walking, it hurt a lot when I stepped on it; the next day I would definitely have to find a hostel where I could stay quietly during the day. At the pharmacy they recommended that I drain the blisters and rest. In his opinion, because of the place where I had them, it had been a mistake not to do it before covering them with the dressings. I bought some hypodermic needles and then went to a supermarket to buy something light to eat. When I returned to the hostel I found David, Isidro and the crew from the previous day at the entrance, making plans to go shopping and have dinner together.
—What, you're not joining us?
"No, I'm knackered," I told them.
I went to my bunk to get the cures. Afterwards I practically didn't move from there because I was comfortable resting my feet, without supporting them they didn't hurt. I studied the accommodation options for the next day on my phone, there was no shortage of them in Palas de Rei. I wanted to give myself a tribute and, to imagine myself as a king, I looked for a hotel called "Hotel Palas", but there did not seem to exist any with that precise name (there was, yes, a "Pensión Palas", but it was not the same ). Then I dedicated a lot of time to the blog because that day, having not been able to pay much attention, I had very little real material to share and I had to invent some story.
At dusk I drifted off into a very pleasant doze. At one point, I was woken up by the laughter of the merriment that the members of the group who were having dinner together in the hostel's dining room were having. I identified Isidro, who started singing some couplets with a lot of feeling and a very powerful tone of voice, like that of an Antonio Molina. When the piece ended, you could hear olés and a lot of applause and cheers (and laughter, poor Isidro) in the fun that the others were having. I was glad not to be with them, I preferred to rest in my bunk, calm and alone, but connected through the chronicle I had just written.
28. Palas de Rei — Arzúa (28.5 km)
I slept very well and in the morning I waited for people to leave and the bedroom to be clear before getting up and planning my day. When I got off the bunk and took the first steps, I found that my blisters didn't hurt. The feet looked better than the day before. I put on my sneakers and I said to myself: what am I going to do all day long today in this town? I felt encouraged to see how far I could go. Maybe he would reach Melide, halfway there; In this way, perhaps he could complete what remained until Santiago in four simple stages, instead of the three official ones.
I started walking calmly, consciously, and then I realized that everything was not bad. And as the morning progressed, but especially as I approached the end of the short stage to Melide that I had planned (fourteen kilometers), I realized that I could continue further and, who knows, maybe even finish normally in Arzúa.
When I arrived in Melide I smelled octopus as I passed by some shallows. There was a small window half open and I looked out. Inside I saw a man with a pile of octopuses whose heads he was cutting off with a knife. A few steps away was the famous Ezequiel grocery store. It was only eleven in the morning and, for how big the place is, there were very few people. At one of the adjacent tables, Isidro and David were finishing a portion of octopus they had shared. Since they did not give me a very warm welcome, I sat next to them but not with them, since I left a free space away. They continued to barely pay me any attention and, remembering how much fun I had had in his company and his anecdotes just a couple of days ago, I felt hurt. They immediately got up to pay and left without remembering to say goodbye to me. After all, I told myself, I was the one who had walked away in the first place.
I ordered Galician broth and a portion of octopus. To drink, a glass of ribeiro. Without explaining anything to me, the waiter placed a whole bottle of wine and a rustic cup without handles on my table (and I ordered a "copa" of ribeiro). I assumed that serving the entire bottle was the rule of the house, that they didn't mess around, so I didn't protest. I told myself that since I would have to pay for it anyway, I was going to drink reasonably. And so I did, I watered the broth and the octopus thoroughly. The wine ended up making me sentimental and I remembered Toni. I sent him a message:
Hello Toni, I'm at the Ezequiel grocery store in Melide, just as you recommended. I'm on my way to Arzúa, but I stopped to give myself a treat: broth, octopus and ribeiro. I've had my stories these days, things got complicated for me with the blisters (the descent to Ponferrada from Cruz de Ferro killed me). But here I am, about to arrive in Santiago. I hope you are going down the Primitivo well, I suppose you will come to this same place where I am now. Thank you very much for your recommendations and teachings, you see that I have followed them to the letter. A hug.
When I finished my lunch and went to pay, I found out that for the bottle of ribeiro, they only charged you the approximate amount you had drunk. Anyway, nothing was happening, I felt happy. Before leaving the premises I received Toni's response in the form of a voice message that he had recorded while he was walking:
Nothing, I'm glad you're having a good time. Thanks to you for putting up with me. And what else? About the feet and such, remember that you are Basque, there is nothing left for you, you already have it, that is, with two balls, and what is left and nothing is the same. And here I am, nothing, the Savior for me was harder than this, it is also an up and down. Otherwise, all good. I'm also tired, don't believe it, on the climbs I look like a locomotive blowing. And my feet and that, well, nothing, in my line, I'm doing well. OK? Well, nothing, I repeat, I'm very happy. Take care, hugs.
When we left the grocery store it was raining. It was the first time it rained during the trip. I had no choice but to wear the new cape that I had bought specifically for the Camino. I was a little hesitant to put it on, because with the backpack bulging behind me I would look like a hunchback. But I immediately saw pilgrims dressed in ponchos, so I retreated to a corner and I also put on my raincoat. When shortly after we left the urban area of ​​Melide to enter a eucalyptus forest, it seemed to me that I was part of a column of porters.
It wasn't raining very hard, but my shoes were getting wet and that could also be a cause for concern, since my shoes were completely permeable. When I was preparing the trip I had given this question a lot of thought, because, as in Formula 1 races, before the start it was important to choose well between rain or dry tires, since due to the weight I could not carry both. peers. In anticipation of the heat of the plateau and so that my feet wouldn't cook, I decided on dry shoes, light and breathable summer shoes. But now I was faced with the problem of water, because walking with wet feet was very bad due to the greater risk of chafing. Just when it seemed like my blisters were finally giving me a break.
However, the rain turned to drizzle and finally the water stopped falling. I continued to advance little by little, with the lenses of my glasses covered in drips that did not allow me to see well, but happy because it was going. The blisters were still there and the discomfort eventually appeared, but it was nowhere near the torment of the previous day. Furthermore, unfortunately, I was almost in Ribadiso de Baixo, a town that had a magnificent Xunta hostel on the edge of a river and that was three kilometers from the last climb that ended in Arzúa.
I was close to completing the official stage, which was one of the long ones (almost thirty kilometers), and I wondered if my feet were finally healing. I couldn't know it. But it seemed clear that this was a day-to-day matter. Or even moment by moment, because, feeling victorious while going down a fairly steep path towards Ribadiso de Baixo, I stepped wrongly on some tree roots that were sticking out of the ground and I was about to twist my ankle and end up on the ground. What a getaway. When I recovered from the shock, I remembered what Toni had told me about what it meant to reach these final heights of the Camino: being so close, there was no God that could stop a pilgrim; If necessary, people were capable of doing the last kilometers crawling on the ground in order to reach Santiago.
The only thing I visited about Arzúa was its main street, very long, through which you entered the town and where the shops and hospitality establishments for pilgrims were located. I didn't think it was a very charming town, although there was, of course, a great bustle of people. Just as in Melide the French Way received the Primitivo (which Toni was coming down from Oviedo), in Arzúa the Northern Way ended (the one that runs along a good part of the Cantabrian coast from Irún), and I suppose that, with the contribution of These two tributaries, the Camino River here became a large estuary near its sea in Santiago.
The Xunta hostel was located in a large house in the center. It was uncomfortable and followed the same pattern as the previous ones in terms of the few facilities it offered. In the bathroom, before getting into the shower, I was shaving in front of the mirror when one of the members of the group of Spaniards who had formed in the last two hostels entered, one who was middle-aged and whose name I never remembered. .
—With razor and everything, eh? —She told me with a mocking tone as he headed towards one of the toilet stalls.
It hurted me. The truth was that he didn't remember seeing other pilgrims with electric razors during his trip, although he hadn't noticed me too much either. Many men did not shave and I imagined that the rest would use razors, which were lighter to carry. Would they consider me a fool? A lazy lick? Because that guy would tell the rest of the group, of that he was sure, after all I had avoided them.
Fuck it, I told myself. What I was missing was worrying at this point about the journey of a comment like that, what an idiot. There didn't seem to be anyone but us in those indoor bathrooms and I thought of a way to return it to them. I had noticed that the fluorescent lights, in addition to turning on, were all turned off from a single switch next to the door (something in these aging hostels). I turned off the razor and waited. Then the wheezing sound of effort sounded followed by something, plop, falling into the toilet bowl, and I quickly left the bathroom, turning off the lights and leaving the man in the dark while he was doing his work, while I heard him shout for someone to turn them back on, I I shit on God. I went to my bunk, I would see if I could shower a little later (I didn't, the showers had curtains and the clothes had to be left outside).
How could I do that? I was not that style, far from it, and now I had complicated my existence by fearing the reaction of that individual (and that of the rest of the gang). In the room I changed my clothes and went out to the street to look for a bar where I could take refuge with my cell phone and my notebook and a beer. Then I went to a supermarket and bought bread, a pre-cooked meal and a yogurt for dinner. Lunch at the grocery store was already far away and I was hungry, so I told myself I would have dinner early, thus avoiding meeting the others. I heated the precooked meal in the hostel's microwave and then, when I was halfway through the plate, David appeared in the dining room carrying a pile of loaves of bread. He said that for the evening they had organized a joint dinner.
—Why don't you come, nano? There will be many of us, more people have signed up,” he told me. Furthermore, Isidro has promised us a new recital of verses, look how much we laughed yesterday.
He seemed like a good guy, David, that “nano” (pronounced nanu) he used to address you made me feel accepted. More people appeared, carrying plastic bags of snacks and bottles. They began to prepare dinner and I, who was alert and uncomfortable, prepared to leave. It made me sad to fail him, perhaps he would take it as a lack of consideration or education on my part. Or maybe he didn't even notice. I tried to at least say goodbye to him as I left the dining room, but he was engrossed in his conversations and laughter with the others.
"Now what's left and nothing is the same," Toni had told me encouraging me that morning in her voice message. And in pain, time plays in my favor, I thought. And what I had left I wanted to use in something meaningful to me, so I went to the bunk to rest and write for the blog.
In the bedroom I found the individual I had done the job for in the afternoon in the bathroom. Nothing happened. I suppose he himself would be embarrassed to tell it and have the group burst out laughing at what had happened to him. What's more, he even had a kind gesture with me when he finished recharging his cell phone and gave me the plug.



Suddenly, the word “vahos” came to mind. The ones my mother prepared for me when I was little for colds and sinusitis. My senses processed this aroma and only later did I understand it: it smelled of fumes because the forest I entered was made of eucalyptus trees and, after so many days of sun, it was finally raining.
29. Arzúa — O Pedrouzo (19.3 km)
There were only two stages left, and both were easy, just twenty kilometers long. That was already done. I left the hostel and went straight to the bar opposite. I ordered coffee with milk with Galician bread toast. Once I had breakfast, with daylight, I set off. After the rain the day before, the weather was good again, the sky was clear. Oak and eucalyptus forests alternated with small towns surrounded by cows, pastures and corn crops. That flowed, with the number of people walking I felt like I was swimming as part of a school of fish downstream. There were even parents with children, and that was quite a novelty, because it was the first time I had seen Niñogrinos (an acronym that I formed when I saw them, to have a little fun). The truth is that it was Sunday and they were doing a little hiking as a family.
Near O Pedrouzo, I met a middle-aged man, with a ponytail and loose hippy-type clothing, who was waiting for the pilgrims to pass next to the stand he had set up in a park pavilion. I passed by looking out of the corner of my eye, as I always do in these cases, but a few meters later I stopped, thinking: it was a book he was offering.
I retraced my steps. The guy was showing his book to a pilgrim at that time, so I was able to browse calmly. On a low table covered by a lilac tablecloth, he had stacked some volumes along with a stamp for credentials, a saucer with candy and another for the donation. The whole thing was like a little altar, although the incense was missing. I picked up a copy. It was quite bulky, it was heavy. Shared loneliness. What a good title for a book. The cover showed an image of a sunset over the sea and the following quote: "The awakening of consciousness is inevitable if you risk the void of uncertainty." It was signed by a certain Walter. Immediately he approached me.
—Did you write it? -asked.
It was assumed, although on the flap of the book, as the author, there appeared a photo of a Labrador dog named Flan (it was the same color as a flan).
—We wrote it between Flan and I, we are both the authors. "I'm Walter, how are you?" he told me, shaking my hand and then bending down to caress Flan, who had approached us in the meantime.
Walter was Argentine and had written the book while walking the Camino de Santiago a few years ago. Without rushing: in the morning he walked and in the afternoon he wrote. He now lived on the Camino, literally, since he slept in his van, parked right there, next to the pavilion. He was delighted with the public's response to his work; he had reprinted it for the fifth time and even had an English version. I congratulated him. Truly, it seemed to me that there was a lot of merit in writing a book. Now, I told him that I was prohibited from allowing even one more gram of weight into my backpack.
"But a book doesn't weigh anything," he told me.
No, what's wrong, I thought. And above all this one, almost five hundred pages long.
-How much does it cost?
"The will," he answered. It was obvious that he had the response rehearsed: we are on the Camino and here things have no price, they go by donation.
I leafed through it, hesitating. But I read some phrases between poetic and sapiential, with words like "Love" or "Universe" written with a capital letter, which sounded like New Age spirituality to me. I told him I needed to look at it a little more and he gave me the address of a bookstore in Santiago where I could also find it. Or Pedrouzo was around the corner, and Santiago, so to speak, too; That's why, as he walked me away from his position, I understood that Walter had chosen very well the exact spot in which to place his voluminous book.
In O Pedrouzo, absentmindedly, I passed in front of the Xunta hostel without realizing it, since it was somewhat hidden behind a building at the entrance itself. The town reminded me of Arzúa, here too the urban center was accessed through a nondescript main street, with residential blocks on both sides, whose basements were full of bars, restaurants and shops. It gave me the impression that I was in a tourist place, because a boy stationed on the sidewalk was handing out advertising for the restaurant behind him, which offered special menus for pilgrims. The offer was wide and I continued a little further. I had left the hostel behind, but I decided to stay there and eat something before returning, settling in and sleeping there for my last night in a shared room.
At the hostel I had a pleasant surprise. At reception, instead of a counter or glass booth at which to wait standing, there was a table with a couple of chairs so that the pilgrim, upon arrival, could sit during the registration process, quite a consideration.
—It's cooled off, hasn't it? —Commented the woman in charge while she wrote down my information.
Sure enough, it was sunny but a cold autumn wind had picked up.
"If you're cold, tell me and I'll turn on the heating a little," he added.
The cordiality of that woman was leaving me stunned.
"Do you mind if I put you on an upper bunk?" She asked me-. It's just that everyone asks me for the ones below and I'm running out, and if someone comes to me who really needs it...
The truth is that I was tired of always having to play on top, especially because I had not dared to ask the previous hieratic managers to change it to someone on the bottom. But now I had the opportunity to do it, that woman was kind and made me feel confident enough to ask her. She could use any of the excuses given by other pilgrims, especially the Spanish. Without going any further, moments before I had heard two short-sighted young men who were ahead of me say that they needed to sleep downstairs so, just in case they needed them, they would have on hand the glasses that they kept in their backpack at night.
"Sure, no problem," I said, however, accepting an upper bunk.
It was never easy for me to claim something, not even when it was easy. But in that case, grateful for the treatment of that woman, I felt indebted to her and I loved having the opportunity to reciprocate by facilitating her work. Had she only been in the position for a short time?
When I entered the bedroom, I found my beloved gang there, lounging on the ground floor of the area where I was going to sleep, and I understood that, with a little more time in that position, that hospitable woman would most likely become in a manager more like the ones I had encountered until then. Or else, in order not to alienate herself from her, she would abandon her work.
At dusk I went for a walk around O Pedrouzo. It was Sunday and a cold wind was blowing. Here and there a few pilgrims were seen, but in general the streets had a desolate appearance. Lately I hadn't met many of those who had been at my level during the trip. I knew that some had deserted the public shelters, but even so I did not see them on the street or on the road. Perhaps they had fallen behind, or more likely they had gone ahead taking advantage of the fact that the last two stages were short. In any case, on that melancholic afternoon, in the inhospitable O Pedrouzo, I missed them and wondered where they were.
Since I had nothing to do, I went to see where I had to continue the next morning. On the outskirts of the town there was a milestone whose plaque said: "Km 19,308." It seemed incredible to me that the trip was about to end after almost a month and nearly seven hundred kilometers traveled. Arriving in Santiago, the question among the pilgrims was whether or not to continue to Finisterre. "Do you follow Finisterre?" those in the group had asked me. They did go, all together. No, it was enough for me. The objective was Santiago, and Finisterre was still the extension of an experience that for me ended the next day, with its good part, because it was finally over, and also with its bad part, because unfortunately it was over. But it was important to give it the intensity it deserved. In the future I could continue doing more Caminos, or perhaps the same one, again. But it seemed to me that that first Camino that was about to end was also, in a way, the last. So I returned to the hostel full of anticipation and nervousness for what awaited me the next day.
30. O Pedrouzo — Santiago de Compostela (19.4 km)
I woke up from a troubled dream around one in the morning. I got down from the bunk, being very careful not to make noise so as not to wake up the person below. In the dark, I had to feel around to avoid tripping over the backpacks that had been left next to the beds. Loud snoring could be heard from different people, each with its own particular sound and rhythm. As I crossed the heated room towards the restrooms, I had the sensation of finding myself in an engine room or in the bowels of a mechanism that had something of a sleeping monster about it.
That morning almost everyone got up very early, many did so at five o'clock to arrive early in Santiago. It was not clear to me why there was such a rush to get there, although it was true that, once in Santiago, the pilgrim had to comply with quite a few rituals. In any case, I decided to take it easy because I wanted to savor the last stage, so, sleepily, I waited until the bulk of the people had left before getting up.
I left the hostel later than ever, almost at eight o'clock, the deadline. I had breakfast at the first cafeteria I found and then hit the road with daylight. There was a large influx of pilgrims. The landscape was typical of the last few days, basically composed of eucalyptus forests. I noticed how my steps automatically followed the yellow arrows and milestones, it was as if after so many days of training, these signals had been incorporated into a navigation system in my brain, an autonomous mechanism that was in charge of searching for them and taking me without me I'll take care of it. Maybe that's why I was more receptive than ever to the changes that were taking place in the landscape, to the background noises of a highway, the roar of the planes at the airport that had to be passed or the sound of the city getting closer. .
My wife had written me a message telling me to say hello to her as I passed in front of a web camera that Galician television had installed in its facilities, located next to the Camino shortly before Monte do Gozo. When I arrived at the place, I called her to tell her about it and so that she could tell me where I had to look, because I didn't notice anything about the presence of said camera and I didn't see it. When I finally figured out where she was, some pilgrims passed by me and saw me waving my hand in the direction of a lamppost.
It was already close to noon and I was about to reach Monte do Gozo (not even a kilometer left), when I decided to delay the pleasure of seeing Santiago a little, giving myself over to another pleasure: that of entering a bar to eat a skewer of tortilla. accompanied by a good beer. I was already celebrating it.
A while later, I arrived at the monument-hulk located at the top of the hill. I was disappointed to see that the city could not be seen from there due to the growth of some trees that blocked the view. Furthermore, I missed the sculptures of the two expressive medieval pilgrims pointing to the cathedral towers as the end of their long journey, an image that had been etched in my memory since I had seen it in photos. Where were you? I sharpened my eyes a little on the dry mountain due to the drought and spotted them in the distance, solitary, about five hundred meters from where I was. I walked toward them along the park's paths, increasingly lonelier the farther I got from the Camino. In fact, when I reached the landing where the sculptures were planted, I found myself completely alone and, with my presence, I scared some magpies into flight, squawking. Now I could see Santiago and the towers of the cathedral in the background, and I felt close to the joy of those two enormous bronze figures that accompanied me.
I waited for someone to come because I wanted to take a photo. It seemed incredible to me that no one came close, but it was true that detouring here meant walking a few extra kilometers and Santiago was just a stone's throw away. After about a quarter of an hour a couple of pilgrims finally appeared.
When I came down from Monte do Gozo I found myself on the outskirts of Santiago. In the book The Immortal Path, I had read that the entrance to the city via the French Way was ugly, but it didn't seem that bad to me. There was no red carpet waiting for the pilgrims, no special welcome, and I liked that, it seemed more authentic to me, as if no one cared about our arrival. I made my way through the outskirts of the city, mingling with passersby, noting the metal scallops embedded in the sidewalk that guided my steps. I was accompanied by the excitement of seeing the directions on the traffic panels to access the historic center of Santiago, when I was not arriving in the city by car, but on foot, and also for the first time in my life.
It was almost two in the afternoon when I reached the old town. Suddenly, a group of people started applauding me from the other side of the street ("Come on, cheer up!" they shouted). They were from the gang, David and Isidro among them, already showered and cleaned. Since they had arrived at eleven in the morning, they had had time for almost everything and now they were waiting to go together to collect the Compostela.
I headed towards the finish line alone. During those days he had fantasized about arriving at the Plaza del Obradoiro accompanied by the sound of a bagpipe. In my dream I anticipated the pleasant emotion of having achieved it. I imagined that in the blog I would describe it by saying something like: "...and then it seemed to me that everything bad about the trip - the blisters, the fatigue, the heat, the snoring, the top bunks, the pre-cooked meals and even the hostels of the Xunta—, everything had been worth it for that incomparable moment in which one enters the Plaza del Obradoiro.
And sure enough, when I was close, I heard the bagpipes. But just when I entered the passageway that leads to the square, the bagpiper who plays there in exchange for some coins stopped to take a break. The first thing I saw when I entered the esplanade was pilgrims lying on the ground on their backpacks looking at the façade of the cathedral. In the center of the square, I turned around and did the same: I undid the ties of the backpack, dropped it and sat on the ground reclining on it. "That's it," I told myself. "It's over". I spent a while like that, resting, looking at the cathedral and the people. I sent a message to my wife informing her of my arrival. I kept an eye on those around in case I saw a familiar face, but I didn't see anyone. Where would they be? It was as if they had vanished after a dream. Some took group photos, laughed with happiness, I also saw some tears because of the emotion and the upcoming goodbyes. I needed someone to take my photo. There was a Korean who was also alone and, with all the kindness, he gladly offered to do it for me. I wondered if he was the same one who knocked over the wine bottle in the Triacastela restaurant and to whom I didn't offer my help. I sent the family the typical photo with the facade of the cathedral behind me. Afterwards, not knowing what else to do there, I headed to the hostel.
Following the recommendation that Toni once gave me, I went to the Seminario Menor hostel, a former priests' seminary converted into an immense hostel for pilgrims, located in a green area not far from the old town. I had the pleasure of staying in an individual cell, which for me, after a month of common dormitories, was a luxury despite the monastic austerity of the room, composed only of a bed, a sink and its mirror, and a small table with its chair. I had regained my intimacy! Something as simple as having a plug to myself or the freedom to turn off the light whenever I felt like it at night. Not to mention not hearing snoring or waking up early.
No one was waiting for me, so I had all the time at my disposal. After shaving, showering, and lotioning my feet, I no longer washed my clothes, and therefore hung them out. I went back to my cell, locked it and lay down on the bed to take a nap.
The first thing I did in the afternoon was go to the Pilgrim Reception Office, located on a street near the Plaza del Obradoiro, to have my credentials stamped for the last time and to receive the Compostela. It was close to five, so I hurried because I knew there would be a lot of people. And indeed, when I arrived I found a long queue that extended through the galleries that surrounded the central garden of the house. The line exceeded the length of the hallways and, as if it were access to a mass show, there were ribbon posts to organize the rows of people in a coming and going. When I got up I said hello to some familiar faces, but I didn't talk to anyone. You couldn't hear the snorts of impatience so characteristic of these situations, it was a calm and I would even say happy crowd.
After almost two hours, it was finally my turn. On a monitor they indicated the counter number (of a total of seventeen that were open) to go to when a bell rang. A young woman in front of me passed number two and, at that moment, number one was free, so I waited for the imminent call. But it didn't happen immediately because the official stared openly at the girl who had passed before me. Then the doorbell rang and I jumped. Nervous, upon arriving I handed the credential to the employee. He gave me a sheet of paper to fill out with my information and answer the questionnaire. They asked about my profession. Which was? I put "Programmer", and as soon as I did I realized that it couldn't be more true, even if I didn't work, what else did I dedicate more time to in my life?
—What, should we fire Lopetegui or not?
-As? —I asked him, looking up from the paper, confused.
But it wasn't me that the man was talking to, but rather the security guard who suddenly appeared behind me with a boring walk. In any case he didn't answer me (maybe he didn't even hear me), so I looked down at the sheet again while he continued discussing with the guard the complicated future that the Real Madrid coach still had before him.
Reason for the pilgrimage? I checked the “Spiritual” box. I returned the questionnaire to him. The official consulted something on the computer, I assumed it was the correspondence of my name in Latin. Then he wrote it with a black marker and, adding the date, he gave me the long-awaited Compostela while congratulating me in a formal manner. He didn't even look at the stamps on my credentials.
I left the counter telling myself "how nice they are after all, they don't charge you anything." But before leaving, they made you go through a stall where they sold the official cardboard tubes to carry the diploma rolled up inside. Two euros. And I paid for them, of course, everyone bought them, it wasn't a question of taking the precious Compostela home in any way among the dirty clothes in the backpack.
It was after seven when I plopped down on a bench in Plaza Fonseca, right next to the cathedral. I called my wife. There was great excitement in the street, the restaurant terraces were filling up. I saw a group of Italians pass by and, shortly after, another group of Germans, they were all pilgrims with whom I had met dispersedly during the trip and only now I saw them gather by country to celebrate. The Camino was definitely over. When I finished talking on the phone I realized that I was dying of hunger and thirst, and behind me was a pizzeria, just what I needed.
Inside, I was placed at a small individual table in front of the open door of the restaurant. Still, I was discreet enough to not feel like I'd been punished. Neapolitan pizza and cane. While I was eating dinner I saw the people crossing the little square. I was already with the coffee when I saw two women passing by who seemed familiar to me from the road. They also recognized me and decided to enter the restaurant. We greet each other. Their faces were very familiar to me, but I only clearly remembered having passed them that same day, on our late entry to Santiago: both of them in their fifties, one of them walked with great difficulty while the other stopped to wait for her.
They sat down, took off their shoes, and ordered a pitcher of sangria. Shortly after I had finished and, as I was about to leave, I hesitated for a moment, but in the end I turned to them to wish them once again a "good Camino", this time in their lives. They were Canadian and they congratulated me for achieving it too.
—Do you follow Finisterre? —one asked me.
"No way," I replied.
And then he raised his hand and showing me the palm he said:
—Nor are we. High five.
I hit them, first to one and then to the other. And I said goodbye to them forever like someone saying "see you later", smiling inside and thinking that, without a doubt, this was the best thing about the Camino.



http://www.crtvg.es/crtvg/camaras-web/o-bando-san-marcos



This is where I wanted to get. In the background you can see the towers of the Cathedral of Santiago (in the image they can only be seen above my head). I share the joy of these two giant bronze pilgrims, these ones, those with cape and staff. More than any other, this is the photo I wanted to take.
Santiago de Compostela
At night I was awake until late in my room. Since I was the one who decided what time the light went off, lying in bed, I took the opportunity to take notes and calmly write the texts that accompanied the photos of the day.
The next morning I woke up at eight feeling rested. I resumed my habit of shaving and showering in the morning as soon as I got up. After a month, this was also new. I dressed in my walking clothes and walked out through the very long corridors of the old seminary. After the area with individual rooms, we crossed the area with shared bedrooms and common rooms, with shoe racks full of boots and indoor clotheslines loaded with clothes to dry. It was like being in a hotel inside a hostel, or the other way around. As I moved through the corridors I passed familiar faces who I greeted, but now I was embarrassed to stop and talk. It was as if I no longer belonged to that world that had been mine until a few hours ago.
I headed to the old town for breakfast. I received a message from my wife in which she attached a screenshot of the Pilgrim Reception Office that read: "Yesterday, Monday, 1,034 pilgrims arrived in Santiago." "And one of them was you," she added. In the window of a craft store, I saw some earrings with a beautiful scallop-shaped design. He already had his gift.
Around eleven o'clock I approached the cathedral. There were many people, tourists and pilgrims, both on the Camino and on organized trips. I got in line to enter the main chapel to embrace the figure of the apostle Santiago. It happened that I fell right in the middle of a group of retirees from some Spanish region. I had them in front of me and behind me and they were making a big fuss. Not only them, the bustle was general and, from time to time, from the loudspeakers, silence was requested, because we were in a temple and there were people praying. Then, for a minute or two, people would hold back, but then they would forget and the commotion would return. The line was moving very slowly and we were getting nervous because at twelve, in half an hour, the pilgrim mass was going to begin. I noticed the lady behind her, who was pushing me with the bag. In the end I had to tell him:
—Madam, you're pushing me!
"Oh, son," he answered.
I stepped aside to let her pass. But immediately, the retirees who were behind the lady took advantage of the gap left by her to gain ground and get on my level. Now I was the one who had to push them laterally to get up and not be left out of the queue. It was pissing me off. In the end I decided that I would hug the Apostle another time and I left the line to go down to the crypt, where his tomb is. Fortunately, there was no wait here, although the movement of people was continuous. I looked at the urn containing the remains, but I was more careful not to make those who came next wait, so I didn't find out much. I left there and went to sit on a bench to wait for the mass to start.
It turned out to be quite monotonous. Next to me, a German pilgrim of a certain age (in boots, she must have just arrived in Santiago that morning) was falling asleep during the sermon: she leaned towards me and felt her weight on my side, until just when I was about to lay down. The head on his shoulder shook and, waking up, he straightened up again. I noticed the funny little hands that intermittently peeked out from behind the figure of Santiago on the altar (they were the hands of the person who was giving him a hug at that moment). She surprised me that they continued to let people pass during the liturgy.
I assumed that the mass would end without further ado, but at the end of it the priest announced that the botafumeiro was going to start. I didn't expect it, supposedly they no longer did it except on designated days or if the corresponding fee was paid, something that large groups had access to. The head priest said: "You can sit down." And then not only did no one who was standing sit down, but the rest of the people got up from the benches while their cell phones were getting ready to take photos. Indeed, it was quite a spectacle.
I had the afternoon left to do whatever I needed to do before returning home. The next day, at the Santiago station, I was going to take a train (the Intercity La Coruña-Hendaya) that in ten hours would leave me directly in Zumarraga, a few meters from where it all began. What things are, under normal circumstances I would have considered this long train ride a drag; However, now it seemed very comfortable and fast to me.
I went to the city expansion and bought Santiago cakes for the whole family. Santiago was a city with a lot of movement that Tuesday afternoon, there were no pilgrims in the commercial streets and, myself, going shopping and going to take a look at the Follas Novas bookstore, I felt like another urbanite.
At the last minute I returned to the vicinity of the cathedral to visit the Museum of Pilgrimage. I took a tour of the rooms that explained the history of the Camino de Santiago, but what caught my attention the most was a temporary exhibition of photographs. It was titled “Walkers,” and in it, its author, a photographer named Tino Martínez, showed portraits of current pilgrims. Below each image there was a short text in which the person portrayed explained their story in a few lines.
In the same exhibition there was also another series of landscape photos, in black and white. In one of them, between undulating fields, a dirt road appeared that forked, and in the background a walker could be seen continuing along one of the two branches, moving away from the other option that he had left behind. Watching her, I remembered that when I left home, until the last moment I doubted the exact day on which to leave. I was considering several possibilities. In principle, as long as it didn't rain, it didn't matter a day before or a day after, the decision depended solely on me. And at that moment, looking at the photo in the exhibition, I felt a certain vertigo when I thought that if I had not gone out precisely on the day I did, I would not have met the same people I met or lived the same experiences. A single day before or a single day after and, for example, I would not have met Toni! The story would have been different. The path taken would have been different, an alternative one, like the one left untrodden in the image before him. However (and this really surprised me), after having completed mine, it seemed impossible to me that things could have happened differently than they did. This and no other was my story.
Epilogue
Two weeks after returning from Santiago, after rediscovering the comforts of being at home and quickly getting used to them, I began to miss the Camino. After a month of walks and uncomfortable shelters, returning to my reality felt hard. Definitely, I too had been captivated by this experience.
Coming back on the train a curious thing happened to me. The Intercity that was bringing me back was already in Vitoria, close to Zumarraga, where I was looking forward to getting to hug my wife, who was waiting for me at the station. I was absorbed, looking out the window, when suddenly I saw a little boy, about three years old, holding his mother's hand and from behind the turnstiles leading to the platform, quite a distance away, waving goodbye to me. . Until I realized that it was not me he was addressing, but his father, who had boarded the train and was settling in a couple of seats from where I was. The train started and we crossed the new neighborhoods on the outskirts of Vitoria, full of apartment blocks for sale. Many apartments for sale. And then I remembered that I was still not working. And along with the pang that these thoughts unexpectedly gave me, I was invaded by the worry that was really behind them: the question of what I should do next to occupy a place again, a matter that I had left aside for the first time. leave for Santiago. What overwhelmed me was the realization that as soon as I got off that train, I would lose the identity I had enjoyed for the last month and return to indefinition.
Although it seemed that the trip had done nothing more than evade the problem, at the same time he believed he had achieved something important. To the happiness of being reunited with my wife, my family and my things, was added the illusion of having become visible to my surroundings. They had followed with interest my blog, in which I believed I had shown myself. There was proof that, despite everything, it could work, because from what I had shared it could be deduced that I was alive and the only thing I was looking for was a path that would allow me to continue. But I needed trust.
During those first days I felt the pleasure of being the protagonist. I couldn't stop telling my wife details of the things that had happened to me. One of my brothers told me that every day, after putting his children to bed, he dedicated a few minutes to the blog, it was like following a novel, a few photos accompanied by short texts that, with the little time he had, he read with pleasure. My other brother told me that he had liked to know the inside of the Camino de Santiago and that he had wanted to do it, if it weren't for the fact that work prevented him from doing so. My father, during our weekend meeting, asked me questions that I was happy to answer and remembered the anecdotes at which he had laughed the most.
But after this injection of self-esteem, in a few days things went back to where they were before. On another occasion we talked something about my adventures, but then nothing more, as naturally life continued and I, finding nothing more to offer, returned to my usual silence. And with my silence the painful feeling of failing again returned. I was even ashamed of everything I had said on the blog, perhaps it was just nonsense after all. That's when I started to miss the Camino.
I had to write this book. Perhaps she could prolong the communication. I would be lying if I said that during the trip I had not thought about writing it and that the material I was accumulating on the blog, as well as the notes in my notebook, were not ultimately directed towards this project. But now it was clear that I had to jump in and get to it. I had no other choice. In the same way that when I started the Camino the objective was to reach Santiago, now I was considering starting a new uncertain adventure that would take me several months with an equally clear objective: to write a book about my experiences and that also talks about me.
I had tried other writing projects before and always crashed. It had been too hard for me, too much work and uncertainty for the confidence I had in myself. But now he had a guide or base that consisted of the material he had collected, something like the help that the Camino provides with its signage and its infrastructure so that the inexperienced can travel it.
So I set out with an approach similar to the one I had taken during the pilgrimage. I would get up early and after breakfast I would sit in front of the computer to go through the stage I had decided to write about that day. He spent the morning doing this, until he reached the hostel, which was lunchtime. Then I would go to the mountains to walk for a while, and in the afternoon, I would shave, shower, take care of practical matters and read, and at night I would go to bed early. And so every day, with a routine just as if I were doing the Camino de Santiago. Of course I was haunted by insecurity, inside my head the critical voice told me: «Who do you think you are trying to write a book? "You better leave it and start doing what you have to do." Sometimes that same voice would rebel and move into the physical realm, sapping my strength and forcing me to slow down: as if my foot had become inflamed. Other times the lack of confidence directly landed me on the couch: as if I couldn't walk because of the pain of blisters. But when I recovered, I always took up the path again, because both the route and the method were already established to help me finish it.
So by writing about the trip and in this way, I also returned to that intense experience that the Camino de Santiago was for me. And now that I've finished it, I can't stop looking for other ways to get back to it.








This edition of
On Your Way to Santiago.
A trip on foot
It was printed by Amazon.

