

YOUR SANTIAGO'S WAY

WAY OF WAY
YOUR SANTIAGO
A journey on foot
Mikel Imaz
















© Mikel Imaz, 2019

ISBN: 9781082388132
PoD Amazon edition by the author


All rights reserved.







CONTENTS
Before leaving 9
Basque Way 13
01. Urretxu/Zumarraga — Beasain — Zegama (23.9 km) 15
02. Zegama — Salvatierra-Agurain (21.9 km) 25
03. Salvatierra-Agurain — Vitoria-Gasteiz (27.8 km) 33
04. Vitoria-Gasteiz — La Puebla de Arganzón (18.8 km) 41
05. La Puebla de Arganzón — Haro (30.1 km) 49
06. Haro — Santo Domingo de la Calzada (20.7 km) 57
Table 67
07. Santo Domingo de la Calzada — Belorado (22 km) 69
08. Belorado — San Juan de Ortega (23.9 km) 75
09. San Juan de Ortega — Burgos (25.8 km) 81
10. Burgos — Hornillos del Camino (21 km) 89
11. Hornillos del Camino — Castrojeriz (19.9 km) 101
12. Castrojeriz — Frómista (24.7 km) 111
13. Frómista — Carrión de los Condes (18.8 km) 121
14. Carrión — Terradillos de los Templarios (26.3 km) 129
15. Terradillos — Bercianos del Real Camino (23.2 km) 139
16. Bercians — Mule Mansilla (26.3 km) 147
17. Mule handle — Leon (18.5 km) 155
Mountains 163
18. León — San Martín del Camino (24.6 km) 165
19. San Martín del Camino — Astorga (23.7 km) 173
20. Astorga — Foncebadon (25.8 km) 181
21. Foncebadon — Ponferrada (26.8 km) 193
22. Ponferrada — Villafranca del Bierzo (24.2 km) 207
23. Villafranca del Bierzo — La Faba (23.1 km) 217
Galicia 225
24. La Faba — Triacastela (25.5 km) 227
25. Triacastela — Sarria (17.8 km) 235
26. Sarria — Portomarin (22.2 km) 243
27. Portomarin — Palas de Rei (24.8 km) 251
28. Palas de Rei — Arzúa (28.5 km) 257
29. Arzua — O Pedrouzo (19.3 km) 265
30. O Pedrouzo — Santiago de Compostela (19.4 km) 271
Santiago de Compostela 281
Epilogue 285

Before leaving
On weekends I usually meet my father. First we had a cut and then a couple of drinks in the bars of the village. That Saturday, the first day of September, I waited for the second zurito to tell him:
"I am going to make the Way of Santiago."
"Don't fuck with me," he replied.
The truth is that I didn't see it at all clearly either, but not so much for walking the Way itself, but for doing something that didn't belong to me at the time. That's why it had taken me so long to decide.
"That's what I'm saying, it sounds crazy," my father added.
What he did not know then was that I had been preparing it for quite some time. I had bought some new shoes and, during the summer, had gone out to walk daily with them. In addition, I had informed myself on the internet about the practical aspects and had also read a couple of books in which the authors told their experience. But until the last days of August I did not go to the Decathlon of San Sebastián to do with the backpack and the rest of the team, and only then did I make it official: in September I was walking to Santiago.
Those days I slept badly. In the morning I got up in dust and, in the bathroom, with a sense of unreality, I came to mind what I was about to do: to embark on a trajín of discomforts and leave my wife alone for a whole month. And I also felt guilty for what I was not going to do: to look for a job and return to normal.
A few days before leaving, I approached the neighboring town of Beasain for my pilgrim credential, the document that I was going to identify as such. It was provided in the hostel of pilgrims that there is in this municipality, because here passes the so-called Basque Way of the Interior, a route that begins in Irún, crosses Guipúzcoa, then Álava, and finally in La Rioja to link with the Camino de Santiago by antonomasia: the French Way.
I had an idea: taking advantage of the proximity of Beasain, about twelve kilometers away, I would walk to Santiago coming directly from the portal of my house. I liked this plan, I would make my trip something special. It seemed even logical to put it this way, although I did not know of anyone of the people who had done the same thing.
That very afternoon I had received the following wasap from my father:
Hey, thinking and not wanting to put me in someone else's shirt, because you will have it well thought out, the first journey, from here to Beasain, I don't know what's in jacobeo. If you want I could bring you by car to start from there.
I replied as follows:
The pilgrimage begins at home, so all the ways to go to Santiago are Jacobeans. The difference is that the officers are signposted, they are safe and they have hostels. Thanks anyway, we will be there.
In the hostel I was attended by the volunteer hospitalier on that day, a retiree who seemed happy to be able to help me or to be distracted for a while, because that was very quiet. After everything I had read, it was the first time I came into direct contact with the reality of the Camino de Santiago and I felt somewhat nervous. But the hospitalier’s willingness encouraged me to consult him about the doubts he had pointed out on his mobile phone, several questions that had not been clear to me when preparing the trip. I asked him:
"Is it advisable to wear mats just in case?"
As soon as I said it, an alarm sounded in my head: I had said “just in case”. I had escaped without realizing it. The guides I had read agreed to point out that only the essentials had to be carried in the backpack, and that excluded the “just in case”, a squeaky expression that exposed fear. But the man did not take advantage of the ball he had shot and did not finish off with a goal. Simply, he merely gave me his opinion, without paternalisms. So, confidently, I continued to ask: Was the mountain pass of Zegama well marked? Were there pillows in the shelters? Were they usually filled? Was it convenient to call to warn us of our arrival?
"Come," he said a little later, "I'll show you the bedroom so you can get an idea.
I accompanied him to a door that opened asking me for silence. Inside there was a row of unoccupied bunk beds (all with their corresponding pillow), but at the bottom someone rested and that is why we did not enter.
"She is a French pilgrim," the hospitalier whispered to me, closing the door carefully. "She is seventy years old and, from what I understand, because she does not speak Spanish, she comes walking from her home.
Returning to reception I noticed that I had calmed down. He gave me the credential, a simple bellows folded letterhead with space for the stamps and that I filled with my data. He then stamped my first stamp on it and then accompanied me outside. Upon leaving I was surprised to find myself still in Beasain, I seemed to have been in another world. We said goodbye.
"Good Path!" the man wished me by shaking my hand.
And then yes, I felt the emotion that that was serious and I could already consider myself, too, a pilgrim.
Basque Way

01. Urretxu/Zumarraga — Beasain — Zegama (23.9 km)
How to get out of my village was not something obvious. I was amazed that I had its complication, being this one, of leaving a place by your own foot, such a basic action. I studied the possibility of going through the mountain, but I discarded it by too convoluted and by the slopes. There was no other left than the arch of the road.
In principle I didn’t care about the day, as long as it didn’t rain. And seeing that they were good for the weekend I decided on Sunday because there would be less traffic on the road. In fact, it was a very good idea to go out on Sunday, because the street would be deserted first thing in the morning and, in case someone saw me, I would think that with my backpack (although big) and my cane I would go hiking to the mountain, since that in holiday it would go within the normal.
My wife accompanied me on the way to Beasain, then I would return by train. Once the first dangerous stretch of arcen was saved, the rest could be done by bidegorri, the parallel track destined for cyclists and pedestrians who go out to walk. It was a beautiful summer morning and we were talking as happy, as if we were taking one of our pleasant weekend walks. Although there was the backpack, which pulled from my back with its eight kilos of weight and reminded me at times that that was different.
As we approached Beasain, with a puncture in my chest I realized that soon we would have to separate. And that moment came immediately, as soon as we met the first yellow arrow painted on the pole of a lamppost. We had to say goodbye.
"You understand that I'm leaving, don't you?" "I can't stay home without doing anything."
My voice failed, it broke. It wasn’t the time and, besides, it was all talked about. But I didn’t think of anything else to say. We hugged each other and my wife, who didn’t seem to be able to speak either, pushed me with her hand gently forward to leave. After a few steps I turned back to take a picture and forced a smile. Still a few steps later I turned back again, but she was walking off the sidewalk and already getting lost among parked cars.
The next few kilometers I made them feeling very lonely and enduring the desire to cry. I looked for the yellow arrows that marked the way. They were painted on the pavement, the streetlights and the walls. I knew very well that (it was passing by a shopping center where we did the shopping) and, however, I had never repaired those signs; I didn’t even know, before starting with all this, that right there was a Camino de Santiago.
The arrows kept me company, nothing more, because I knew perfectly where I had to go to get to Zegama. But in a certain place they indicated a detour that I had not seen, it was for an industrial polygon that I did not know. I doubted whether to continue for known terrain or to listen to the signage. Finally I followed the arrows and immediately checked that they avoided me a crossing of the road and took me down a shorter road.
I had to listen to the arrows, let myself be guided by them. So I could worry about planning the best route. I was no longer on the dangerous road to the exit of my village, deciding whether to go on my right or my left, alert in case a truck was passing by me. Now I was inside a safe road called «Road of Santiago», with its infrastructure prepared to help me. So, supposedly, my head could stop worrying about some things and try to pay attention to others.
For example in my shadow. To protect me from the sun I had put on my hat, which, along with the bundle of the backpack and the hiking stick (or trekking stick), projected on the ground a silhouette that looked like that of a genuine Jacobean rosemary, of the cape and staff. That was me now. I took a photo in my shadow with the intention of hanging it later on the internet, on the blog of the trip that I was going to share with the family.
I felt strange walking with those pints because I didn’t see any other pilgrim like me. That sunny Sunday morning I crossed the bidegorri with retirees in tracksuits, families with children on bicycles and runners (runners) in middle age. I was moving forward by leaning hard on the cane. Actually, I didn’t know very well what to do with this complement and, as I wore it, I felt like I had to give it a use or at least appear it.
I had passed the sadness and it was going well, although I noticed the tiredness of the walk. And there was a moment, getting closer to the end, when I even got scared when I noticed the pressure I was putting at my feet. Suddenly, I felt them crushed inside the slippers. I realized that carrying eight kilos on my back (about sixty-five that weight) was no nonsense, not at least after a certain number of steps taken.
Because that was another: it was the first time I walked so often. My previous preparation during the summer had consisted of daily marches of five kilometers, ten times. And always without weight, I refused to exercise with a backpack full of potatoes. Because in this regard I had decided to believe in something that I had read somewhere and I had liked for its elementary simplicity: that learning and training of truth occurred in the course of the Way itself. It was not necessary to obsess.
I arrived in Zegama early in the afternoon. In a park at the entrance, I ate the tortilla sandwich that I brought from home. Then I went to the village floor to have my credential sealed and, along with the paper sheets, they gave me the keys to access the hostel, located in the schools. I thought I would probably be alone, but I found the door open and inside a man lying in one of the bunk beds, a guy with the gray hairy hairy hair and the beard trimmed, which was incorporated to present himself. It was Toni.
"I thought I'd be alone too," he said.
From Irun he had walked along with another pilgrim, but that very morning his companion had had to leave and return home because he had broken his feet.
The hostel had been improvised in a gymnasium with very high ceilings. There were a handful of loose bunk beds in the middle of the court, like playing a game between them. I extended my sack in a bed that was a reasonable distance from Toni’s and went to the shower.
Upon returning I noticed that the man wanted to chat. It seemed boring, with nothing to do on a Sunday afternoon in Zegama after having completed his stage practically without losing his hair. We exchanged some basic information and I withdrew to my bunk to write in my notebook the impressions of the day. At a time I heard from his breath that he had fallen asleep. Later I too was transferred.
When I woke up I was gone. I went out for a walk and immediately I found him down the street. We sat on a terrace for a cane.
He liked to chat, Toni. He was from Barcelona. He was dressed a bit like I, from Decathlon, and, perhaps because of it and his garbo as he moved, he did not appear to be sixty-one years old. He was pre-retired, he said, hence that he could devote himself to making the Camino de Santiago throughout the year, he had lost the exact account of the times he had completed it on his different routes, although the Basque Way was the first time he traveled it.
I kept to the expectation without giving him more details about me, although soon I warned that the conversation with Toni was safe because he did not leave the Way.
"And how about after day one, something hurts?" he asked.
"What I'm doing is ground, and it hurts, my shoulder hurts, I don't know if I haven't tightened my backpack ties too tight.
"It is normal to feel discomfort during the first few days, until the body gets used to the weight," he said, exercising his shoulders up and down and circularly. "Does one shoulder bother you more than the other?"
"Yes, it is right that hurts me.
- Did you carry the cane in your right hand?
Indeed, it was for that reason, because of the tension with which I had grabbed him and leaned on the ground.
A dog came up to us sniffing at the corners of the terrace. Toni put his hand inside his jacket and pulled out a water gun with which, then, he ran the animal. He stared at it, impávido. Finally, he did not shoot, although he could have done so, since the gun, which was made of transparent plastic, was loaded with water.
"To drive the dogs away is the best thing there is," he said, impossing his voice, and he began to laugh alone while putting the gun on the table.
The dog left his own without understanding anything, like me. In the literature on the Way was a recurring theme, that of the precautions to be taken by dogs that could bite the walkers in the mountain. But I saw this more as a danger of other times, not of the present ones.
"Moreover, if any, you have the cane for something, don't you?" I added.
"The cane also serves to check the step before putting your foot in a barrizal, which going with slippers is something that is appreciated. What brand are yours?
They were simple, permeable Salomon. Apparently they were good at making the Way of St. James at that time, and I was relieved to hear him say it because I carried everything quite cheap from the Decathlon and feared that, before experienced pilgrims like Toni, I would notice that I had no idea. But he too had equipped himself in the same chain and in this regard I remained calm.
At one point, Toni gave the water gun to a child who was playing around; apparently, he had been given away that morning by the companion who had had to leave.
We went back to the hostel and I stayed outside to call and chat with my wife for a while. When I finished it was not yet dark. I looked towards the imposing slope of the massif of Aizkorri that rose like a dark cloud above my head. The next day I would climb up the mountainside, although I did not see it clear: if the first stage, very easy, had left me crushed, how would I go in the second, much harder?
The week before, in order to inspect the terrain and thus appease the restlessness, it had occurred to me to approach by car there, to Zegama, and to make an excursion following that same path. But, no, I resisted it as well as the thorough training in the previous weeks. Those actions had tempted me as a way to control the risk and ensure success in this company. However, with them I risked killing the reason why I started.
I didn't want to use the trip to feel good about completing it (one more point for my résumé), adding flirtingly that I had left home and, who knows, maybe getting it finished in less time than usual. No, for once in my life I wanted to put it differently, because if not, I knew what would happen: that I wouldn't learn anything really valuable.
I thought I had prepared enough so that the journey would not become painful to me or risk giving up because I was not in shape or for lack of foresight. And from here, I wanted to leave room for uncertainty. Because this time, instead of pulling away from me, I wanted to accompany myself and have the opportunity to live with my fears. I was counting on them not to overflow me and I could be present, because for something I had not gone to the adventure, but to something much more measured like the Camino de Santiago. That was my idea.
Toni had already slept, so I too got into my sleeping bag. It was strange to be there, trying to sleep in the middle of a school gym, sharing that space with a stranger. Just twenty kilometers away was my house, but everything had changed. Suddenly, I had lost the comforts and, precisely because of that, I no longer had time to worry about my future in the medium term. Now I needed to take care of a more concrete morning, to rest, to eat, to stay and to advance attentively to what happened to me, one day after another. In the background, the objective was clear: Santiago. And that, despite everything, gave me a feeling of calmness, to feel that, having taken a path, at least I had the next weeks solved.



In Beasain, before the yellow arrow (painted on the lamppost) I bid farewell to K. These are my first steps on the Basque Way. The times I have passed here and never noticed these discreet signs. From now on they will be my daily bread.



Bidegorri to Zegama and the imposing massif of Aizkorri looking at me from up there. I seem to be laughing at what awaits me tomorrow. I do not have them all with me because I have never walked so much or with such a heavy backpack.
02. Zegama — Salvatierra-Agurain (21.9 km)
I slept fatally in the gym in Zegama. I wanted to rest well, because the second stage was going to be very hard with the climb to Mount Aizkorri and the passage through the tunnel of San Adrián. But the restlessness about the journey that had just begun and that a stranger slept nearby, disturbed me. I regretted having taken a nap. Until very late I heard the hours in the bells of two churches, the furthest one went with a delay. At some point I fell asleep, but then I fell asleep several times during the rest of the night.
At about seven o’clock I was awakened by Toni’s movements by preparing his backpack. I got up and also started to pick up my things, delaying him to come out first because I preferred to go alone.
"See you later in Salvatierra, I'm going slow," I told him when I saw him doubt whether to wait for me or not.
I went to the fonda to return the keys to the hostel. I went into the bar giving the good morning with an energetic "Egunon!" (which even surprised me by its sound) and ordered a coffee with milk. I felt clear and strong, something that had already happened to me on other occasions after a bad night before an important event. Adrenaline (or whatever it was) took care that in the morning I felt well disposed.
When I left the bar I had to continue down a narrow street where there was a traffic light to regulate the alternative passage of vehicles. I stopped a van loaded with operators who would go to work at some work. I remembered it was Monday. The traffic light went green and I also set off.
Leaving the village behind, the road became a narrow path invaded by the nettles (Toni, who was in shorts, told me afterwards that he had had a really bad time here). I set off the course of a river in which I surprised a stiletto bird who flew as soon as he saw me. Shortly after, when passing by a hamlet, on a poster I put "Watch out for the dog", although the animal was asleep and all he did when I felt was lifting an eyelid.
The steep slope forced me to walk forward. I was cloudy and silent, without wind. Suddenly, I heard a very loud noise, like that of an avalanche of stones. I stood scared. I remembered then that I was just above the tunnels where the trains of the Via Madrid-Irun, which in that area enter and leave the mountain as if they were moles, were running.
A little further on, the trail began to zigzag along the slope and the slope relaxed a little. In some short sections it even became flat and, in them, there came a joy that caught me unsuspecting. It seemed to me that it was due to the momentary relaxation of the effort, a kind of message that the body directed to the brain, telling him: «This is going well, boy, we are getting it». At a certain moment I looked up and saw the figure of someone who was watching me above some rocks. It must be Toni, so to not reach it, I pretended that I had not seen it and stopped to rest and eat some dried fruits.
With the height the fog was coming in, but it did not alarm me because the signage was very good, as the hospitalier of Beasain had assured me. Every time I arrived at a crossroads, there were waiting for me the yellow arrows, in official indicators or painted on rocks or trunks of beech trees. Also, if the wrong way was taken away, immediately there was another yellow sign, this shaped like a chi or a blade, warning of the mistake made. That was magnificent, who could go this way for life.
I was already quite high when in the fog a hermitage was shaped. And later I heard a cowbell. But until I didn’t have them in front of me I didn’t see the mare and her foal, who approached me jogging. I caressed him and looked for my mobile phone in my fanny box to take a picture of him. While I was doing so, the foal sniffed at my arm and then bit me, but without making any strength, I don’t know if playing or to know what my jacket knew. He accompanied me for a stretch and then returned to his mother.
I should have been approaching the San Adrián tunnel. In spite of the low visibility, I recognized the path of other occasions when I had been there on excursion, as a child or, more recently, with my wife. Those times it had been easier to access that environment, first by car by a track that left you close, then to walk a little and visit the grotto. But now the sensation was different because, for the first time, the tunnel was going to use it “really”, since I needed it to pass to the other side of the mountain just as in his day it was employed by merchants, travelers and pilgrims who came and went from Castile.
I went through the natural cave and followed the remains of the medieval road, attentive to the floor so as not to stumble on the limestone stones. Then a human being appeared. I felt instinctively close to that young man who came running towards me, for finding us in such a lonely place and not having crossed with anyone in the last hours. I was perfectly equipped for a mountain race (trail running), seemed to be training. But I don’t think he saw me passing by me, so focused that I was looking where to put my foot between the stones. In that spectral fog it was like to doubt my own existence.
It cleared and the sun appeared as soon as I started the descent on the other side of the mountain. In the distance, between the oak tops, the ochre tones of the Alaves fields began to appear. I felt exultant. And that in the descent I noticed more clearly the bluntness of the weight of the backpack and the oppression on my feet. But, curiously enough, it did not seem so threatening anymore because the first stumbling block was overcome and I was not going to have to go back home to the first ones of change. It would have been too humiliating. That danger was what had really disassembled me the day and the night before. And to rule out any possibility in this sense, I sat on a rock to change my socks. I had to take care of my feet, taking them wet by the sweat increased the probability of friction and for nothing in the world I wanted to happen like Toni's partner, the one of the water gun that had to return home with broken feet.
It was more than two o’clock when I arrived in the first village, Zalduondo. I sat in the shade of a chestnut tree next to a fountain of several pipes and pulled out of my backpack all I had left to eat, some cheese and bread. A young man appeared to fill a bottle of water.
"Are you going to Santiago?" he asked me smiling.
The expression of his face, I recognized it immediately, was pleased to have the opportunity to talk to someone who was going on a journey far away from there.
- And where do you come from?
Beasain, I told him, not to complicate it. From the other side of the mountain, quite close therefore. And yet, I had the impression that it came from far away, perhaps because of the drastic change that had occurred in the landscape. When I crossed Aizkorri, I had left behind the green and humid Guipúzcoa, and now I was among the fields more typical of Castile and the imaginary that I attributed to the Camino de Santiago. I think it was in this brief talk with the young man when I definitely believed him. By saving the mountain and leaving the usual stage of my life, I noticed myself more confident. I had already started and, yes, I could say yes, I was going to Santiago.
I arrived in Salvatierra at about four o’clock in the afternoon, on a very little road, taking care not to lean on the cane, although the shoulder, fortunately, no longer noticed it pained. In the municipal sports hall they sealed my credential and gave me a key to access the hostel, conditioned this time in a booth that had been dressing room of the adjacent football field.
- Spectacular tour, huh? - He wanted to share Toni when I showed up at the door.
"Yes, well, I knew him already," I said, "I don't know why, lowering his enthusiasm.
It seemed like we were going to be alone again, so I chose my bunk in the other little room of the two that I had. I put the paper sheets that I had been given on the mattress and pillow, extended the sleeping bag and started the routine of tasks that I would always repeat on my arrival at the shelters: shaving, showering, giving me cream on my feet, washing the clothes and laying it. Then I was free. In the hall there was a series of lockers inherited from when it worked as a locker and, since the little rooms were very narrow, I put my backpack and my things into one of them, I put a coin in the slot and threw the key.
"Do you lock up and everything, eh?" Toni told me, with a tonillo.
I was right, that had been ugly, as if I didn’t trust him. But I had come out automatically, I wasn’t thinking about what I was doing; and now, the one who felt offended was me, because of the way he had told me. I was upset, I recovered the coin by leaving the key in its place, in the open locker. I threw myself into the bunk to rest and write in the notebook. Thankfully, I had my own room.
But a while later two couples of French retirees appeared all sweaty. Toni, always very attentive to the social issue, did not have them controlled because, apparently, they also came from Irun but in previous stages they had stayed in hostels. I changed my bunk to leave them alone in a room sharing Toni’s. When they had installed, one of the French women, the only one who spoke some English in the group, came to our door:
"Are you angry?" asked us smilingly, "Are you angry?"
And what was that all about, and with that smile?
"What do you say?" asked Toni, who didn't know English, entering his bunk.
I ignored Toni's question because the situation had troubled me, and I told the woman no, that at all. Then, when he offered us, while smiling some pasta they had bought in a bakery arriving in Salvatierra, I realized that, as a good Frenchman, I was unable to pronounce the aspirated axe well and, instead of "angry", what I had meant was "hungry", "hungry", "hungry", to see if we were hungry.
"Merci," said Toni, who had risen up to take a pasta.
I was left without mine because I had already told him no. He left us alone again in the room, accompanied by an uncomfortable silence that made me thunderous. Toni prepared and went to the street without telling me anything. Then I also went out, to see if I had any discomfort.
Among the expectations I had before embarking on the trip was to spend some time in the afternoons to do some tourism in the villages, but already from the first day I checked that I had barely time left. From Salvatierra the only thing I visited was a supermarket Dia and a bar, both located in front of the hostel. In the super was Toni, buying like me some pre-cooked for dinner. In the box we waited for each other and on leaving we proposed to throw a cane. The beer reconciled us.
"You know, the French aren't the only ones, we've taken someone else on our way.
He waited for me to ask him, "Yes?"
"Yes, he has caught me in the tunnel of San Adrian, while I was resting. He is a Madridman who goes to the hotel," he said somewhat derogatoryly. "When I told him that you were coming back, he told me that he actually saw you going up.
I remembered the mysterious figure of the kind who watched me from some rocks as I went up. Then I also saw him, I thought, wrongly believing that he was Toni. But between one thing and another, I did not tell him anything and pretended not to see him; just in case, not to mess it up, it was not that, because I had not told him at the time, I suspected that I was hiding something from him and in some unexpected way he would hesitate again.



Making a walk is not like going out for a walk. I had previously crossed the San Adrian tunnel, but I had never had the feeling of authenticity this time. On this occasion it was not a visit. I really needed to use the tunnel to pass across the mountain, reach the Alavesa flat and continue my journey.
03. Salvatierra-Agurain — Vitoria-Gasteiz (27.8 km)
I slept well.
"Yes, it has already been noticed," Toni let me go as we got up.
It seemed that I had snored. I found it wrong to disturb him, but those were not forms, I could have told me otherwise. Besides, how much had I snored? Very little? In any case there was no time to turn this issue around, I had to get going.
It was still night and there was fog. The bar across the street was closed and I decided to pull forward, believing that I would already find somewhere else to have breakfast. Guided by the arrows I passed through an industrial polygon of large ships and intense traffic, and then I went into the field by a dirt and gravel track, leaving behind the hustle and running alone with the noise of my footsteps. Toni reached me, whom I had left shortly before eating breakfast in the hostel, «see you later», he said to me as I was ahead. It was somewhat lower than me, although of much stronger build. I had a determined walk and carried the staff in my right hand, without supporting, like a curled spear that made me swing forward and back setting the pace of his advance, a two, a two. It was immediately lost in the fog.
With the light of day everything became whiter. The track crossed ploughed fields and beyond a few tens of meters there was nothing visible. I stopped for a moment and, as the noise of my steps on the gravel ceased, I felt a great stillness. With that whiteness, it was as if I was wrapped in cotton wadding. A little later, the road disappeared swallowed by the fog and could not see where it was taking me. And yet, it was nice that way of heading towards the unknown.
During the summer, in the weeks before my departure, I had proposed to prepare the trip in all its details. I started by analyzing every stage, the interesting places I would spend. It was important to select the hostels I would stay in, make sure that they were okay, that they had good reviews on the internet from the users. I wanted to take it all pointed out. But I got tired and left it for when my exhaustive research reached León height, about two weeks away. So much work without even knowing if I could get there, it was a bit absurd. And when I left this task, I realized the importance that the trip had to be long and, therefore, expensive to control beforehand in all its aspects. It offered me the opportunity to accept a certain dose of uncertainty as an integral part of it. Somehow, on my way to Vitoria, it was as if the visibility of those tens of meters that I had before me was planned. The rest was behind the thick blanket of fog and I would discover it as I progressed.
Because also, so much looking at me for these first days and I had not even foreseen that, at this stage, in the small towns that I would go through, there would not be a single bar in which to have a coffee with milk. In one of them I got into the portal of his church and, in the absence of anything else, I enjoyed a breakfast that consisted of a handful of dried fruits with bottled water.
I got back on the road just as the two French retired couples with whom we had shared the hostel were passing by me. What a rhythm they were wearing! But I wasn’t going to be any less, so I squeezed their way to follow them. They seemed to know about trekking, they handled with good technique the two canes that each one of them wore. Of course they weren’t going for a walk, theirs was a full-fledged march. Sometimes they kept up with two of them, chatting, but as soon as one was left behind for some reason (a reprecho, for example) the other one didn’t expect it and each one followed at its own pace, for later, perhaps, to get to the same height again. It was like a cyclist “making the rubber” about the one he’s pulling, or perhaps less dynamic, like trucks that advance indifferent, each maintaining their speed along the parallel lanes of a highway.
I had already cleared the fog and the sky was flat. I was surprised that Toni came from behind, apparently an emergency had arisen and had gone one kilometer away to a somewhat larger town, Alegria-Dulantzi, to satisfy her in a bar and to take her coffee. When she reached me, she adjusted her speed to mine to tell me that, after passing to me first thing in the morning, she had also overstepped the Madrider, «but don’t see what it cost me, I was going like a motorcycle». As she felt like it, she said she was going to try to hunt him back. I started to tell her about the extraordinary march that the French retirees were going on ahead, but just at that moment Toni stopped dry to fit the slippers and I didn’t wait for it, but I kept my step as I had learned to do, leaving myself with the word in my mouth. Then Toni shot out and overpassed us all like an exhalation.
In one of the following villages, the French stopped for lunch and at last I could leave them behind. Later, I began to glimpse in the distance the figure of someone walking with two sticks. It appeared and disappeared between the undulations of the ground. It must be the Madrid. I pressed the step a little closer to get closer, but the distance between us seemed insurmountable. Sometimes I saw it distorted by the refraction of the hot air on the heated earth. At the end I took it for impossible and stopped to rest.
The stage was getting long, I noticed the tiredness. It was noon and the sun fell to lead. And besides, my head hurt: I lacked my daily dose of caffeine. Then, after several kilometers, when I reached the top of a hill, the skyscrapers of Vitoria appeared in the distance. «Victoria!», I sang. I thought that that was a piece of cake, that I would immediately reach the city. However, just as it would happen to me on other similar occasions during the trip, I was victim of a psychological effect that occurs when the end of a stage is within sight: the goal seems close and, therefore, the last kilometers become longer. With the heat it made and the desert landscape of the fields, civilization was something like a mirage that never was reached.
I met Toni again, sitting in the shade in a bank of the last remaining town just before I entered the municipality of Vitoria. It seemed to me that I was waiting for him. From Madrid he said that there was no trace, as if he had vanished. At that point I was not sure or that I had seen him, perhaps it had been a vision, because the senses had been buttoned up. We started to walk together, since I knew the city and it would be easier to get to the hostel. However, Toni kept walking fast, without realizing it I was setting an intense pace that could endure hard. But at the same time I also wanted to get there the sooner and I was liking to see myself able to hold his pulse. When we reached the neighborhoods of the periphery, the intense rhythm became devilish, we had little to start running, we crossed the avenues with the traffic light for pedestrians in red, until suddenly I noticed a prick in some place of the left foot and I said: “Enough!”. What the hell was I asking for a portal without a pelda.
- But are you all right?
"Yes, I'm fine, I just need to get some rest and go somewhere to eat something.
- We should give ourselves the phones, just in case.
I gave him long, we would see each other later, there was no loss. When I saw that he had left I waited a few minutes before getting back on my feet. False alarm, it seemed to be all in order. I got into a hypermarket and bought a packaged salad and a bottle of fresh water. I ate sitting in a park, taking my time until I recovered. Then I continued without hurry until arriving at the hostel, located in the Old Town.
In the afternoon, after shaving, showering, giving me cream on my feet, washing my clothes and laying it down, I didn’t go to rest in the bunk. I put on my walking clothes (pantalon and T-shirt identical to those at work) and my sandals, and I told Toni that I had met a friend who lived in the city. I went straight to Artium, to the Museum of Contemporary Art. There, in his cozy modern coffee shop with air conditioning, I looked for a table next to a plug to recharge my mobile phone, I ordered a coffee with milk and a croissant, and I took the notebook from the bag that I had with me. I started to write enjoying the comfortable seat and every sip that I gave to the café. I sounded chill out. I was glad I didn’t give Toni my phone number, to feel there, in those moments, unattainable. I was a good time, a long hour, dying, trying to recover the tone, using the notebook as a terminal to communicate again with myself. And I remember that I asked the inevitable question that, it seemed, all pilgrim was done at one time:



On my way to Vitoria, Toni went ahead and then I stayed alone. I stopped for a moment and, as the noise of my steps on the gravel suddenly stopped, I felt a great stillness. It was like being wrapped in cotton wadding. Before me, the road disappeared swallowed by the fog and I did not see where it was taking me. But it was nice.

04. Vitoria-Gasteiz — La Puebla de Arganzón (18.8 km)
In Vitoria, the hostel was actually a youth hostel and we had to share a room with some kids who slept late after going out through the Old Town. In addition to the noises and snoring, I was told the voices of someone who spoke very loudly in dreams. From a certain hour in the morning, I was waking up repeatedly, consulting every time the hour on my mobile phone. Until finally it was six o’clock, a reasonable hour to get up and bother making some noise when I picked things up. When I breathed the tranquility of the street I felt it as a release.
Toni stayed at the hostel for breakfast what he had in his backpack and I didn’t have a hard time finding an open coffee shop in which to replenish myself. I ate an omelette pincho accompanied by a latte coffee while from my table I saw the city wake up through the window. I felt a weirdo with my trot-world appearance, especially when two executives came in with a suit and tie who took coffee alone in the bar. When an hour later I left the shop, I faced the hustle and bustle, people rushing towards their jobs and the children to the schools in their early days of the course. Through avenues with a wide pedestrian walk in between, I looked for the tiles with a scallop that marked the exit from Vitoria. I was sure only I saw them. I was going in reverse way, as most people were going to the center. Maybe because they were sleeping, no one seemed to repair in me, as if I found myself in one of those agitated dreams with many people for whom I was invisible. But I said to myself that, like them, I was doing a job, a task that was simply in my case.
In a residential area on the outskirts, a small monolith indicated that there were 630 kilometers left until Santiago. Almost nothing. In the moment of taking the photo, I caught in the picture by chance two girls who had gone out to run in the morning, and I felt like them, with the motivation that the return of the vacation provides (at least during the first days) to undertake a new purpose in life.
The stage was short compared to that of the previous day and I set out to go alone, without falling into the trap of following the rhythm of others. And since I did not meet anyone, neither Toni, nor the French, nor the Madrider, I went calmly on paths that ran between fields and low mountain. I climbed a hill a few meters from me to a rapacious path that lifted the flight when I saw myself and started to plan over the valley. And a little later, a roe that was in the middle of the field rushed to take refuge in a grove giving jumps. In the three small villages (or rather hamlets) I passed through, neither saw anyone.
In the online guide to the Camino de Santiago that I consulted on the mobile phone (www.gronze.com), I read that in La Puebla de Arganzón, in order to access the hostel, it was necessary to ask for Mr. Vicente (so, without last name) in the Ansotegui bar. Right there I met Toni, had arrived a while earlier and had been told to wait a bit, that Vicente at that time was not there but that he would return.
"One more stage," Toni said, bumping into our glasses.
I drank it from a drink, so good was the beer that I took a picture of the anodyne glass that I returned to the bar.
Mr. Vicente, a grisly man who seemed to return from the orchard, asked us to accompany him. It was not easy to understand him because, in addition to the sound, he ran over when he spoke and did not pronounce clearly. He led us to what in times must have been the teacher’s house: a simple village house next to the school, with small rooms full of beds. Vicente explained everything about the facilities and finally told us where the bank was for the donation.
"Yes, don't worry, Vincent," Toni told him to show him that with people like us, we didn't have to remember him, because we were pilgrims from the real ones, to trust.
How dangerous it was to leave it in the hands of everyone’s conscience. It was the first “donation hostel” in which I was staying, in the previous ones the modest price of a few euros was fixed and paid in advance.
I shaved, showered, gave myself cream on my feet, washed my clothes and tended it, and after eating a salad of packaged pasta that I had bought the day before in Vitoria and to rest a little in bed, in the afternoon I started to write in my notebook on the table that was in the kitchen.
"But what are you writing, macho, your memories?" Toni let me go as soon as he appeared there after his dream had been thrown out.
He also kept a small Moleskine-type diary in which he used to telegraphically point out the data of the stage and how it had gone during it. The question was that Toni ventilated it in a few minutes as one more task ("my duties," he called it), while I saw myself spending time completing several pages of my spiral notebook.
"I write down my impressions," I said dryly, a little upset that I lost my thread.
But he didn’t seem to understand it, because he sat on one of the chairs in front of me and kept talking to me. Also, soon the French retired accompanied by Vicente appeared. It was clear that I wasn’t going to be able to concentrate, so I closed the notebook and proposed Toni go to the grocery store to do the shopping.
The Ansotegui was a bar and also a grocery store, with differentiated spaces but attended by the same staff. While we were doing things for dinner and for the next day, we saw that Vicente was returning to this “his office”, the place where he supposedly spent the dead hours. When we went out with our bags we found him sitting on the bench next to the wall of the bar, with one arm leaning on a barrel and the other on the back. He started talking to us and getting close to him. He wanted to chat with us a little bit, he noticed that he liked to deal with the pilgrims, perhaps more than with his neighbors.
Toni and I took off some zurites, he didn't want us to invite him to anything. He told us that many people had been there doing the Camino de Santiago.
- And you've never done it, Vicente?
He smiled and, touching his bulging belly with both hands, came to tell us something like, «But you see me doing it with this face?» No, he had never moved from the people and at his sixty years he was not going to do it now. But he had met many people, many foreigners, he had spoken to more foreigners than anyone else in the village: French, German, Chinese, everything.
"Up to two Moors passed through here once.
"But that cannot be true, Vincent.
And hit him with "Vicente", again and again we added his name as a colt, how easy it is to fall into condescension when the opportunity is presented to us.
"It can't be that they were Moors, remember Santiago Matamoros," I told him by being smart.
- Yes, I'll tell you.
We had dinner early at the hostel, the meal schedules had become clearly European. Then we went out for a walk. It was getting late after the day so good that it had done and the terraces of the square were full of people. We went once again to the Ansotegui and there Vicente was still, although he was already going home, as if he had finished his day. However, we were still with him for a few minutes while we took the first zurito of the night. By the looks that directed us, he noticed that we caught the attention of the parishioners.
"What, you've been caught, haven't you?" said one kind of cloudy look that turned to us from the bar when Vicente left. "Have you heard anything yet?" "Because this one is not understood, nor is it a host."
With a bright earring and drunk eyes on his face, he was taking a cup, a tail combo. We said yes, turning his back on him. However, the man did not want to let go of us, he asked us where we were from. I began to put myself on guard while we ignored him.
- What's the matter, you listen to him and I don't?
My heart began to beat hard as I watched Toni turn to him to face him.
"Well, what do you want," he said defiantly.
But it all came to nothing because a friend of his appeared on the scene who, with a smile that he wanted to say “don’t listen to him”, grabbed the macarra and turned it back to the counter. I would have wanted to leave there, but Toni asked for another round.
"Give us two more zurites," he said to the waitress with a more serious tone of voice than his normal.
The girl smiled at us as we served the zurites and I thought that after what happened, it would have been her thing to ask for some ladies reeds. I liked the firmness that Toni had shown. When the case came, I was sure that he would have defended Vincent as one of ours, there was a kind of spirit of union between us, a “To me the Way!”
At the end of the round we left the bar to retire to the hostel. We were leaving behind the tables of the terrace still full when I heard someone gossiping at us and signaling us from the other side of the square, so that we could wait for him. He was a tall man, with populated mustache and unmounted glasses, who walked like he was stepping on eggs. It sounded like nothing to me. I looked at his sandals with leather strips, wore very airy feet.
"I am staying here," he said, pointing with his hand at the Arganzón Plaza hotel, whose façade of manor was illuminated by the spotlights.
I understood that he was the Madrider, at last I was going to meet him. He was dressed in sport, but not in the current sports mode, since he wore a shirt and long pants of khaki color, with many side pockets, an outfit like adventure that reminded Miguel de la Quadra-Salcedo, of whom he had an air not only for his mustache, but also for his clear diction and polite treatment.
His name was Julio and «ba de hotel», but he wanted to share a few minutes of talk with pilgrims like us. I imagined him at the end of the stage, filling with hot water the bathtub of his room in the Arganzón Plaza and then dining à la carte in his restaurant. But he needed to comment on how he was going and to know about those who walked on the same route as he did. We stayed standing the three of us for a while, as if isolated in a bubble in the middle of the square. Like Toni, Julio was an experienced walker, although on this trip he had his feet broken. He said that he had made a mistake with his shoes: instead of some new and somewhat rolled shoes, he had brought other comforts to which he loved but which were worn out. In any case, he had come to travel only the Basque Way and only had two stages left, so he would finish it any way.
"But you won't go so badly, on the way to Vitoria, I thought I saw you going like a locomotive," I said.
"Yes, it is true, I was excited to see that I could keep up, but today I paid for it.
He admitted that he was hooked to endorphins that the body produces by adapting to intense effort continuously. He said that explained very well a book that he had read in French a few years ago. It sounded a lot to me.
"Isn't it by chance the immortal way?" I asked, "it was one of the two books I had read to me that summer in preparation for the journey.
"Immortelle randonnée indeed," he declared in perfect French, "I did not know that they had translated it.
Its author was named Jean Christophe Rufin, a high-class diplomat and well-known French writer. I had read it with interest, although his gaze was somewhat elevated to me; like Julio, he also did not want to know anything about sleeping in pilgrims’ hostels. I wondered if they would know each other.
We were still standing, but I was not tired, I was delighted by the talk we had with this Julio, who had the gift of the conversation and liked to taste the experiences that he told and those that he listened to others. We were left to take together a little wine the next day in Haro. And when we said goodbye I realized that we had not even agreed where or at what time.
05. La Puebla de Arganzón — Haro (30.1 km)
We had been told that at the exit of La Puebla there was a bakery-cafeteria that opened at seven o’clock in the morning. And there I presented myself minutes before that hour, after having slept well, ready to help them lift the metal blind if necessary. I wanted to have breakfast and get going as soon as possible, because the stage was long and hard, according to the guide. Already sitting at a table with my coffee with milk and toast, I watched the news that they were giving on TV. In four days of travel I had completely lost the thread of the current and what they said was foreign to me.
Then Toni came in and ordered an American coffee and a Neapolitan.
"But didn't you have breakfast at the hostel?" I asked.
He smiled shrugging. “As he later confessed to me, he was one of those who came home on these trips with a kilo of extra (something that, on the other hand, was not going to happen to me, I was sure of that).
We set out together but separated. I warned him: «Every one of you, you were with me». In any case it was a stage in which we had each other in sight for much of the tour. Toni seemed to go calmer and, in fact, at a certain point I left him behind in an almond garden, collecting almonds and dagging them with stones. Later he overstepped me when I had to put aside a Band-Aid for a touch (first incidence on the feet).
We passed through several villages of those in whose squares a few elderly people sit in the sun with a staff. Accessing a town, on foot from the field or down the mountain, gave me a feeling like a traveler of another time. Between the houses of the urban center, my cane (which was already learning to support without straining the arm) sounded different against the pavement, with some echo on the first deserted streets. Then I played to push it so that the rubber cone bounced against the ground, thus producing more noise with which to mark my step. I felt special when giving the good days to the locals, as if mine were “serious”, not a simple excursion. Some identified us as pilgrims and wanted us “good Way”, as a cycloturist who saw me from the road and raised my arm a lot, shouted to me: “Good Way, pilgrim!” It was not unusual that some car would touch the horn as it passed. In these efusive greetings I imagined that, the simple fact of seeing me, had brought to some instantly the memory of his own experience of the Way of Santiago and this good must have been.
At the village of Salinillas de Buradón, Toni and I finally reached the pair and, as there was a bar, we decided to have a drink before the climb to the fearsome Portillo de la Lobera. I was thirsty and asked for a large cane (a "cannon"), while Toni struggled the unspeakable to not ask for the same thing accompanied by one of the pinchos that made him eyes from the counter. He managed to overcome the temptation and came to the table only with an American coffee. We shared, yes, some nuts that I carried in the backpack.
When we started again we met Julio, the Madrider, who had just arrived and was resting in one of the benches at the exit of the village. He was wearing a khaki-coloured visor cap, with a hanging rear wing to protect the back of the sun, which only accentuated his scouting appearance. He had left his canes leaning against the trunk of the banana that gave us shade, and Toni noticed that they were the most expensive of those who sold in Decathlon. Then he placed his own side, which was of intermediate price, and asked me to do the same with mine, as it was the cheapest one. “The full range,” he exclaimed while taking a picture of the whole. Toni that touched something, perhaps also because Julio told us that in Haro he was staying at the Los Augustinos hotel (a four stars). The case is that when we said goodbye and with the first slopes, he told me: “Toni this guy today has to pay a wine”.
I started throwing so hard, so much, that Toni stayed off my feet. I came up, I felt euphoric and strong, I don’t know if the beer that I had just had had anything to do with it. I also remember the suffocating heat that I was doing and the discomfort of the cloud of mosquitoes that formed in front of my face, around the shadow that gave them my hat or looking for my sweat. It was impossible to get them off me, I shook my hand but they came back instantly and I felt like a cow harassed without rest. It was so annoying that maybe only for that I got up so fast.
From the hill there was a splendid view over the vineyards of Rioja Alta. The descent was also of steep slope, with the road covered with stones. I was focused, looking to the ground to avoid tripping. Then Toni advanced me to every wick, for the descents of this type made them running. He said that at less time I did not carry the knees so much, something that I did not understand at all because, by the speed, the pressure on them had to be greater. But also, according to him, there was the risk, the challenge, the fun. This I understood better. By the time I got down, at the height of the first vines loaded with tempranillo, I was already walking next to Toni at all rags.
Soon after, Briñas’ departure along the way along the river Ebro suddenly became familiar to me. But I had never been there! Then came to mind a sequence of the film The Way, with Martin Sheen as the protagonist, and it seemed to me that we were going through the same place where it had been filmed. It was amazing that my senses had warned me while I was attending to Toni, who kept talking (he complained that in recent years the spirit of the Way was being lost). I would have wanted to stop to confirm with the mobile that those scenes of the film had indeed recorded there. Moreover, I would have liked to watch the Ebro, but it was as if I too was dragging a stream.
Faced with my inability to put a stop to the race, I noticed how irritation appeared in me. «The spirit of the Way was getting lost»: ¡ha!, often a common place was that for an expert in the matter as it was supposed to be Toni. And while I was flying (or was I the one carrying it?) along the shore of the Ebro, I remember that I thought that he was not exactly the bearer of that «spirit» of which he was talking to me, since I was constantly doing «Ways» of Santiago I saw it before a sport or an entertainment that an authentic pilgrimage, of those once in a lifetime, as I thought.
I got exhausted to Haro, I was stunned on its streets, with dull senses and looseness, I was in danger of getting a foothold with a curb and falling round. When we finally arrived in front of an old chalet that was the hostel, we called the right phone number for someone to come and open us up and we threw ourselves to the ground to wait, without repairing whether it was clean or not.
A volunteer from the local association, a man of retirement age, showed up. He sealed our credentials and took the data before leaving us the keys. Then, wanting to know something about us, he asked us about our experience. When I told him it was “my first time,” he replied:
- Well, it won't be the last one, mate.
I was so fainted that I lay in the bunk without showering or anything and I was fried. In the agitated dream that I had next I kept hearing «the road hooks, the road hooks», while I ran so as not to be hooked by someone who in my nightmare was a confused mixture between Toni and the retired of the association.
In spite of everything I recovered quite well during the afternoon and, after the nap, the shaving, the shower, the cream on the feet, the washing of the clothes and his laying, to buy in a super near and dinner early, we went Toni and I to La Herradura, which is what is called the bar area of Haro. We gave it a few turns to the circuit (like a roulette) and, in the end, we entered a bar with very high ceilings called Los Caños.
And there was Julio, sitting at a table with a pincho and a glass of wine. Casuality? The most striking thing was that neither Toni nor I remembered that we had talked about seeing each other again. But that was magnificent, of such freshness and naturalness, that it even tempted me to attribute it in a mystical way to the powers of the Way.
We sat down with him and ordered a couple of red ones. As the night before, the conversation began to revolve around the stories lived by those two characters on the Camino de Santiago. Toni said that two years earlier he had done it by bicycle, in tandem, pedaled guiding a young blind man from Barcelona, on the Catalan Way first, after the Ebro and then the French, until arriving in Santiago. While explaining the details of his experience with the blind boy, I realized that maybe I was wrong about him, and thought at least, I took off my hat.
I felt part of that pleasant talk because I was allowed to intervene despite my lack of experience. It turns out that both had also traveled abroad (Toni for Latin America, Julio for the whole globe) and, as they spoke, I felt immersed in a parallel world, foreign to the neighboring tables and to the reality of the environment. I had not felt so well being part of a group of people.
"And with all these travel experiences that you have, have you not considered writing something?" I asked.
Actually my question was addressed to Julio, who, with the curiosity he showed for everything, seemed to me that he had to be someone to write.
"I've thought about it many times, but I wouldn't know how to do it," Toni replied.
I told him that simply telling it, as he was doing at that table, would be a good material, then I would find someone who would help him shape it. For example, that trip from Barcelona to Santiago that he had made in tandem with the blind boy, had talked about the problems with which they had encountered, of the tensions that arose between them in spite of the companionship, the good and bad moments. How is it that to do lazarillo on the Way? Being at the same time the eyes of another, did he perceive in a different way the places that he already knew before? How was the arrival in Santiago after such a long and intense trip? Your direct experience, I would love to read that account, I told him.
"You are right, I would have to do just like you," Toni told me when I finished my speech, which I had stayed (I realized now) perhaps too eloquent. And then, addressing Julio, "don't see the pages that fill this in his diary...
"Hey," Julio told me, "sorry I asked you, but how do you last? It's to identify yourself when you publish your book.
- Ha ha, very good.
It was my idea to propose a deal: I would say my last name if he told me in exchange for his own. Because, to see who they were? Toni, pre-retired in perfect physical form, for his boldness and discipline (except in the things of eating and drinking), in my imagination had assigned him a military past, perhaps not very satisfactory because it would explain, considering his loquacity, that he did not yet know anything about his life. Julio, as well as his speaking and exquisite education, could be a magistrate or perhaps a diplomat, because he was very traveled and managed languages. Would Julio be a public character? I was greatly intrigued by this possibility. I was very attentive to the clues he gave because later, when he arrived at the hostel, the first thing I would do was to look for him on the Internet. But there was no luck, I never found out: without knowing the surname it was difficult to give with him in the search of images at Google. I might not be any famous at the end.
We left the bar telling us that we would see each other. But the truth is that when you do the Camino de Santiago you never know if you will see the person with whom you have just shared a good talk again. And Julio we did not see him again, although at least Toni remained calm: the wines he paid us.

06. Haro — Santo Domingo de la Calzada (20.7 km)
We slept at our width in the hostel of Haro, each in a room and the whole house for us because the French did not appear. But the tranquility was going to end that same day, as soon as we arrived to Santo Domingo de la Calzada and joined the multitude of French Way. Due to the uncertainty of what we were going to find, we set off very early, to arrive as soon as possible although the stage was short and practically flat, a walk compared to that of the previous day.
The dawn caught us moving along a road between vineyards, under a very wide sky with scattered clouds illuminated by the first rays of the sun. At a certain distance we saw giant vehicles moving among the vines, giving the impression of being alien insects fallen from the sky that were eating the harvest (when I reached the height of the grape harvesters I wanted to verify that, indeed, inside someone was driving them). I immediately distinguished in the distance the tower of a bell tower and, suggested by how easy it was going to be the stage, I naively believed that that it should be already Santo Domingo. In reality it was Zarratón, a village in the middle of the way in which Toni and I stopped to take the first coffee of the day.
On the way out, I don’t know why, I started to throw like a condemned man, with Toni behind me. In the middle of the field, when I passed by a farmhouse called Madrid de los Trillos, they started barking at me some dogs. There were two and they were tied, but suddenly a third appeared loose, black, not very large, who came running towards me. I instinctively planted the cane in front of him as if he were waving a sword. The animal stood a couple meters away, barking and showing me his teeth. I was very alert, but, extraordinary thing in me, the situation didn’t get out of hand and I didn’t let myself be dragged away by fear.
I knew Toni was coming after me, he was probably seeing me at that moment. Moreover, the dog could not be dangerous if his owners left him free in the middle of the Camino de Santiago (although anyone knows). And then there was the determining factor, something that was becoming increasingly important to me and that I think it was decisive for me to stay there still: the photo could be good, as well as the story, to share it later on the blog. Getting it required not to run away from the scene.
It happened very quickly, all this was considerations that I did almost unconsciously, with the dog barking at me and I pulled out my mobile phone with the hand that was left free, the one that didn't hold the cane. I took several images, I wanted to hit one where the dog was looking at me fiercely and the teeth were seen. But it kept moving and I couldn't get a real good one. And that's when I realized that the dog wasn't centered on me. In fact, it seemed to me that I was boring him and his was more a reflection than anything else. I pulled the cane and at the time he shut up, and with him the other dogs.
When I had already advanced a few meters, the barkings resumed at my back and I turned to see how Toni managed. In the absence of a gun, he squeezed his bottle of water with squirt so that he would shoot out a squirt ("Shut up now, sucker"). According to him, that left them bewildered, although the dogs did not stop barking in his path.
Approaching Santo Domingo, we began to see at some distance the trail of walkers with backpacks that at those moments arrived in the village following the French Way. “Wow!”, I said to myself standing. That seemed impressive to me because after a week in which I had only seen six pilgrims, of a tacada I was seeing something like ten times more.
"The peace of mind is over," Toni said when he caught up with me, looking at them in turn.
I also understood it this way, that a part of the journey was finished that was not going to look anything like what I expected from there onwards.
Seeing all these people, all of a sudden, we were afraid of running out of room in the hostel where we thought we were staying. And that we knew that the Brotherhood of the Saint was one of the greats with its more than two hundred squares. But still we got nervous and accelerated to get there as soon as possible.
In the hostel’s shed we found a line of pilgrims lining up to register. A man indicated to the newcomers, in Spanish and English, that the shoes and canes were deposited in the next room at the entrance, since it was not allowed to enter with them in the facilities. Grilled shoemakers completely covered the walls of that room, with a good hundred pairs of boots and slippers for when I left mine. In flip flops, feeling a little naked, I stood in the queue along with Toni, behind two girls who said they were Australians, trusting that my things would stay in that place at a good time.
We were assigned our bunk beds in a bedroom for twenty people, men and women, in which it was difficult to move without tripping around with a backpack. There were people there from all over the world, but I kept seeing Asians, perhaps because they called me more attention. While I was extending my bag, I looked at a rather older Mexican pilgrim, perhaps seventy years old. I was sitting in his bed with a lost look, I looked tired. I had just heard him speak on his mobile phone with which I would surely be his wife. “Yes, right now I have arrived, yes, the stage was shorter today,” he had heard him say to a very high volume, as to counter the great distance separating them. Apparently, the woman had been frightened because she had called her before the usual hour. “Yes, I am fine, don’t worry,” the man calmed her over and over again. And then he said, “I love you very much”; and repeated it again before he said goodbye to her with a trembling voice. Then she remained with a self-conscious look, sitting in bed, not doing anything.
Some Asians had thrown themselves into the bunk beds to rest inside their sleeping bags, as if they were sick, and for a moment I had the feeling that we had been forcibly held, that we were confined in a sort of concentration camp or refugee camp, away from our families. I missed my wife and wished to be with her back home. But the downfall did not last long because I had to shave, shower, cream on my feet, wash the clothes and lay her. And every day I had to pay attention when performing these basic tasks because the shelter was always a new one and had to be placed and adapted to her particularities. When I returned from the services, I noticed that the Mexican had also started because they had just brought her the backpack from the transport company. So that was: what I had attributed to a melancholy fainting of this gentleman, perhaps it had not been more than a wait to do a great thing until his luggage arrived.
After going to buy dinner from a super, we looked for a bar in which to have a beer. Toni was very happy when he saw that they had bottles of Estrella Damm, his favorite, that he liked to drink it at a morro. I asked for a zurito. The waitress missed the shot a little bit and, in terms of quantity, what served me came to be the same as Toni’s fifth. Not so as to price: one twenty against one eighty.
"You have a bit of an expensive bottle, don't you?" Toni protested to the girl.
"How expensive? It's price from here," she replied. "He looked Romanian because of his accent.
By “here” I understood that he was referring to the people, what it was usual to charge there for these consumptions. I found these prices normal, but Toni did not get off the donkey and, harshly, reproached the Romanian woman who took advantage of pilgrims like us who were passing by. The young woman was not the one who was silent, but that did not prevent her face from reflecting the discomfort she received from a client. I was very sorry, I was sure she had enough to throw forward so that they would treat her like this.
When we went out to the terrace with our drinks I was about to tell Toni that I had not been right. But I didn’t dare. And I don’t remember saint what he started to tell me about his life, of course I didn’t ask him. To me it was enough to attribute a dark military past and to keep sharing the beers, now that we were surrounded by a multitude of pilgrims to gossip about. But the case is that he told me above who he was: divorced, father of a son; for much of his professional life he had been commercial in electrical material, until he got tired and set up a distribution business of the same material on his own, which failed, and then another with a partner who also broke down by the crisis. After that he had decided to dedicate himself to travel, living on sporadic jobs (he didn’t say in what) and with the small subsidy that he received as a unemployed person who was over fifty and five years old. I remembered that, when I met him in Zegama, he had presented himself as “prejubilized”, without specifying more, and now he understood that it allowed him to adopt an identity given within.
I felt compelled to respond by telling him something about me. If we had stood together up here it was a sign that there might be some confidence between us. Besides, it seemed clear that we were going to continue seeing at least Leon. (In Leon, Toni planned to deviate from the French Way along a different route to Santiago.) So I told him that I had a woman (that I already knew). That during my life I had worked basically as a programmer of industrial automatons, but that I had always had a very bad time in the world of work and that, by growing up and trying to get some confidence in myself, I had made a hopeful and at the same time desperate professional leap, as a solution commercial and leading projects. And that this jump, reaching forty, was deadly because after that nothing else. But the consequences had not been at all bad, since the last few years, in which I had been without working, had allowed me to understand that during my life I had followed as an automaton a stressed way of living that responded to a program written by God knows who.
That's it, that's it.
"Well, at least you'll be quieter now, won't you?" he asked.
“No, I’m the same,” I replied. “But it’s funny, I wouldn’t go crazy about it before. I guess so, that I’m better.
They passed near the terrace where we were the two Australians who had preceded us at the entrance to the hostel, and then two other pilgrims who wore tight meshes and according to Toni stayed there as well. I also did not lose detail, why deny it. The street was full of pilgrims and we began to talk about the people. It was more pleasant like this. Later I realized that I was before someone who spent much of the year outside his house, walking “Ways”. Neither Toni was to feel, as a pre-retired, very quiet.
That night I had dinner a precooked potato tortilla, accompanied by white rice and a salad. It was hard to heat the food because the kitchen of the hostel was taken by Koreans (the Asians were almost all Koreans) and had to wait for them to release the microwave. The truth is that the dining room and the common area of the hostel were very lively. There were groups of pilgrims who emptied with joy bottles of rioja. And also many people alone, who at all times disentangled, looking at their mobiles, reading or even writing in their diaries. I remembered the book The immortal way, in it, its author says that I did not take any note during the trip because I trusted in his memory, which made filter of what was really relevant to him when I started writing later on the experience. And he added that even “I was going to see some pilgrims, in the stages, I threw myself to lose precious moments of contemplation to be able to stick in some notebooks. Maybe I had reason, but I needed to write after dinner I went to find my normal notebook and maybe I was “beat” on a long table, accompanied by others that I also I had to write it.



This barking dog came out and I stopped his feet with the cane. I took pictures of him while he stood there. I didn’t get a picture where the dog looked at me at the time he showed me his teeth. But in the meantime I found that his bark was more of a stick than anything else.



The shoemaker of the hostel is spectacular. I count the pairs to know how many we are. The color of the shoes is lost because the dust of the road equals them all. I have made amends to leave my shoes there, and if they steal them? I had to go barefoot to the hostel and that made me feel naked, as if they had seized the weapon with which I protect myself.
Table

07. Santo Domingo de la Calzada — Belorado (22 km)
I spent a restless night in the common room. I had trouble falling asleep because among so many people I kept hearing noises of changes of posture, heavy breaths and snoring. Also, my bunk was by the door and, as the hinges squeaked, I woke up every time someone went out to go to the bathroom. At five o’clock I saw the hustle and bustle of the Koreans, the first to leave. I also heard the song of a rooster and remembered that the cathedral of Santo Domingo, with its rooster and his chicken inside, was very close to the hostel. By the time the six o’clock bells rang I had a good time making time in bed, and at that time, it seemed to me that most people were in dance, so I also got up.
I said goodbye to Toni, who was having breakfast in the dining room. Today, I was trying to get rid of him and go to my air, which would be easier to get because we were on the French Way and the accommodation options were varied. I had told him that in Belorado I was planning to go to a hostel that I had looked at from home, one with very good opinions on the internet.
"It has a garden with a heated swimming pool, and they offer a yoga session for pilgrims," I said, adding that I used to practice yoga.
He seemed to understand. He would sleep in a public shelter, as always.
"Well, we'll see you in Belorado."
When I left I was impressed by the number of people walking in the street despite being still closed night. I got into a café a few steps away from the hostel. The only waiter who had been late in serving breakfasts because apparently the coffee machine was not working well. He was getting nervous, as his clientele was accumulating, he kept going into the establishment. I was also getting nervous while waiting for him to attend me and, through the window overlooking the street, I saw the influx of pilgrims who were on their way. At the end I was overwhelmed and left the place without asking for anything.
I started to follow the groups that were going before me, without looking at the yellow arrows or remembering them. With the poor lighting of the lanterns it is not that the signage stood out, and the flashlight had not occurred to me to take it out of the backpack. In any case, so many people (about twenty) could not be wrong, so I went behind, confident. And when we got to the end of the urban center and we drove into the darkness, suddenly, a local who went out to work in the field shouted at us from the other side of a detour:
- Hey, where are you going?
We heard a few laughs as we quickly turned around, all uncomfortable as our gregarious behavior became evident. Apparently, I was not the only one blindly following others.
Soon after, I noticed an annoyance on my left foot and instinctively lowered the rhythm. But I didn’t want to give it any more importance, it would pass. Or rather, I didn’t want to be bothered at that time, when it was day and I started to look better at the pilgrims I was in front of and those who were behind. I felt like I was part of something like an exodus. I was walking slower than the average and getting ahead every little while saying “Good Way!” with a often foreign accent. I wondered where they would be from. I also started to greet everyone in this way, taking the initiative when I reached someone who was slower. And so I began to feel part of that community.
The landscape opened to wide fields of sunflowers and, after Grañón (where I had breakfast taking my time to relax my sore foot), to wide fields of cereal already harvested. With the early morning, I entered the province of Burgos and realized that the crowd had dispersed. And, while he never stopped seeing pilgrims, I found relieved that in Castile the space was widening and it was possible to walk calmly as if it were alone.
In Belorado, looking for my accommodation, I passed in front of the parish shelter and there I found Toni, sitting outside on one of the tables with chairs that they had like a terrace, all showered and hairstyled, preparing a ham sandwich. I had not been able to reach the first one because “to these early psychos there is no way to reach them”, he told me referring to an Asian who was sitting a few meters away and who had slept in our room in Santo Domingo. Apparently, the parish shelter was fine, without luxuries but clean, and there were still not many people. Indeed, it seemed quiet and, for an instant, I went through the head to stay there with him, but I said goodbye until later and continued until the Four Cantons, which is what my hostel was called.
At the reception I met a small group of pilgrims who had just arrived before me. They had reserved a square, and they had done well because only two bunk beds remained free, she told them in a perfect Englishman, a young woman with a permanent smile that reminded me of the excellent valuations that this private establishment reaped. While searching them on her laptop, she asked them if they wanted to sign up for the community dinner for the pilgrims, in which a great atmosphere used to be formed, since they organized some group activity for people to participate.
I went out to the street. I was still in time to go back to Toni. I threw away the backpack I had left outside the door and rushed towards the parish shelter. But after going about fifty meters, I stopped, doubting. What was I doing? Why was I running away? And above all, how would I explain it? I turned around and returned to the Four Cantons. The previous group had already entered and the hall was clear. I stayed with one of the last two places available, and when the manager asked me if I wanted to sign up for the community dinner, I said no, I didn’t want to. No one forced me to do it, I don’t know what cable had crossed me.
What I did after settling in, shaving, showering, giving me cream on my feet, washing clothes and laying it down, was to go down to eat the menu of the day at the hostel itself. Apparently, in the private shelters, the business was sustained thanks to the kitchen, and perhaps because it was Saturday, his restaurant was full of families of Belorado or of the surroundings and non-panger people. Jewish, hake, bread, wine and flan. I had a week without eating of dish and tablecloth. I had to wait long enough for them to serve me, but I didn’t care because next to my table there was a plug with which I recharged my mobile phone and rested while reading the news.
The hostel was decorated with style and the atmosphere was pleasant. Except in the rooms, everywhere (also in the services) it sounded a musical thread with the best international songs of the last years. They were somewhat melancholy songs that made me feel longing while trying to write something in the common area. I went out to the garden and sat in a chair in the shade of some olive trees, watching at times how someone was swimming in the heated pool. A pity that I did not want to give myself a bath. I remembered the yoga session that they supposedly offered and went to the reception to ask. No, there was no already, told me the always smiling girl, just as I put on the website that service offered it only during the summer (forgetting to specify that their summer was limited to July and August).
At dusk I went out for a walk through the streets of Belorado, a town with shops, most of them closed at that time on Saturday. I would have liked to do tourism with something of formality, as I had imagined I would do in the villages visited, but the truth is that I didn’t have much desire and the foot was resentful. I missed my wife, I would call her later to talk to her. Meanwhile I went a little down the so-called Paseo del Animo, to see if it worked. It was a kind of Paseo de la Fama hollywoodiense that they had mounted along the urban route of the Camino de Santiago. Some famous personalities had already left their footprint there, for example actor Martin Sheen as the protagonist of The Way, whose plaque I took a picture of.
I sat on a bench in the Plaza Mayor, in front of the music kiosk, without anything to do. I saw a lot of pilgrims wandering around and also people from the village walking and bars. Then Toni appeared, who was also going around. I took a great joy. We went for a beer and then we went through a super to buy something for the next day. We said goodbye soon because I had to go back to the parish shelter, since he did have a community dinner, “donating”. Due to our different plans for the next two stages, as we would probably no longer see each other until Burgos, before we separated we gave the phone numbers, this time on my proposal.
08. Belorado — San Juan de Ortega (23.9 km)
In the same hostel Cuatro Cantons I had a buffet breakfast, as in a hotel. I served juice, toasted bread, fried eggs with bacon and coffee with milk. The dining room was small and the manager indicated where to put you to fill the free gaps in the tables. Shortly after occupying my place, a blonde girl with a foreign look sat in front.
“Good morning,” I greeted her.
"Good morning," he answered by raising his eyebrows and opening my eyes very wide, and I interpreted the following: "Good morning but I don't speak Spanish, so if you want to communicate with me, you will have to do so in English."
Her name was Agnes and she was Danish. We commented something about how many people we were doing the Camino de Santiago in September, she had also assumed that this would be quieter than in the middle of summer.
"In fact, tonight I occupied the last square that was free in the hostel," he told me.
- Did you sleep in the Korean room?
"Yes, and they are very kind after all, when I went to bed, they asked me permission to light the lights early in the morning, at five o'clock, which is when they get up. How do you know I shared the room with them?
I explained to her that, if the last bunk was occupied by her, the penultimate was for me. Between the two beds offered to me by the manager, instead of sleeping with the group of Koreans I preferred to do it in another smaller room. Then I regretted my choice. It turned out that it was a gruffy little room in which eight people entered and not one more. I had only a ventanuco, insufficient to ventilate a room-devan in which it was very hot. I spent the night sweating, with my wet back on my polyester sleeping bag. There were no Koreans there, but also someone got up by five in the morning, with the consequent noise of bags when preparing the backpack. And then others did the same thing. At six I got up and felt a great relief when I left the slurry of that scuartucho in which no one was left. It occurred to me that, perhaps, people woke up so much from the desire to escape as before the crowded bedrooms and breath of pure air.
"Don't you reserve?" I asked Agnes.
"I don't like it, I didn't come to do the Road to go on a reservation for fear of being left without room.
I told him I thought the same thing.
And that, when I said it, sounded very good. But as I went out into the street, as I clenched the moorings of my backpack to get going, I heard a group of Spanish pilgrims with their mobile phones saying that they had called the hostels of Ages (the reference town at that stage) and that they had been told that they were complete (the people are taken by the Koreans), and that as in the monastery of San Juan de Ortega it could not be reserved and it used to be filled soon, the best thing was to get around.
Then I began to get overwhelmed again, especially because from the first steps I checked that my left foot was still hurting. It was a pain that covered my entire foot but that I noticed especially on the ankle and back. I think that, for the first time, I was aware that I could really go wrong if I didn’t walk with care. And I also began to look with resentment at those pilgrims who used luggage transport services and passed me by at a light pace, with a little backpack on their back where they seemed to carry an apple and water.
I was very slow. My head, on the contrary, accelerated. If I didn’t run, it was likely that by the time I got to San Juan de Ortega I would find it full. Then I would have to keep walking to Agés, but there would be no room here either (Korean curses) and then I would have to continue to Atapuerca, but it would be too many kilometers for my foot touched, that that day I wasn’t in a position to walk so much. Besides, who would assure me that in Atapuerca there would be no problem with accommodation? I should go booking, I told myself; but no, not to speak, damn it, I had not come to the Road to book, but to be calm, to find myself, with my fears, to think about what I would do with my life.
This is how I walked the first kilometers, until I came up with an idea. I consulted on the mobile the forecast of the weather and the temperatures forecast for that area. I was going to do very good night: clear sky, sixteen degrees, no wind: perfect to sleep at the ground and see the stars. It’s already, I told myself, I already have it. And suddenly, I felt excited about the idea of doing bivouac for the first time in my life. I was the problem of humidity, because I hadn’t brought me the mat-for-if-if-if, but I had enough shelter. I was more concerned about the fear that would happen when I heard some noise of branches in the dark. But I would survive and then I could write the experience, share it on the blog and I would be phenomenal, very adventurous. I think I would never have dared on my own initiative and I felt grateful that the circumstances forced me to it. I was decided: in case there was no place in the hostel of San Juan de Ortega, I would look nearby for a peaceful place, perhaps in a clearing of the forest.
In fact, I now preferred to stay outside and slowed the pace even further to arrive definitely late. In Villafranca Montes de Oca I sat under a parasol on the terrace of a bar and drank a coffee with milk making time. Then I started the climb towards the Alto de la Pedraja through oak and oak forests. My foot continued to hurt, but I went very carefully, leaning on the cane with my left hand to unload some weight on that side (the cane as a crutch). I passed by the monument to the shot in 1936, but, as in so many other special places of the Camino, I did not give him a thought, so absorbed was in my things and in my foot.
In the middle of a pine forest, I arrived at an outdoor stall where they offered coffee, soft drinks, biscuits and fruit, in exchange for a donation. The Oasis del Camino was called. There were hammocks lying between the trees, and seats and tables made with sections of trunks. It sounded summer party music. “What a good roll!”, I said to myself, while I asked the marching woman to take care of what served me a lemonade and, thankfully, I left her a euro. Then she asked me if I had accommodation for that night, since she herself could make me a reservation at a shelter in Agés. So that was it. I told her that I didn’t need it, and that I didn’t need it, and I drank a drink the lemonade I went on.
The majestic appearance of the monastery of San Juan de Ortega caught me by surprise, perhaps because after the twelve kilometers between woods I had forgotten that at some point I had to appear. I went to the door of the hostel looking for a sign with the notice «Complete/Full». But I did not find it and, curiously, as soon as I crossed the threshold, I wished there was room, because all I wanted at those times was to shower and rest in a fluffy bed. And when I entered the reception and asked it, it turned out that yes, «No problem», the hospitalier said to me, who was surprised that I was so loose that year «when last year, by these same dates and by this time, the hostel used to be full». As anyone understood it, I thought, confused and at the same time relieved. I settled, shaved, showered, gave me cream on my feet, washed my clothes and laid it on the clothes that were in the small cloister.
In addition, when I stayed there, that night I would have the opportunity to taste the typical garlic soups of the place. They had become a tradition since Father Alonso, the parish priest who was considered a great benefactor of the Camino for the help he was giving to pilgrims when the current infrastructure did not exist. I could not miss the garlic soups, because they appeared in the other book that I had read to prepare the trip, titled I will never arrive in Santiago. In it, its author, Gregorio Morán, describes a hilarious scene of when they were taken in the presence of this priest, who makes a devastating portrait that does not correspond to the image that has remained of him.
And they weren’t bad, they tasted at least. In fact, I would say that garlic soup was the most acceptable thing for dinner. Today, in San Juan de Ortega there were no more clerics, only laymen, and instead of having dinner as a family, he lined up with the tray to serve you food in a large dining room. The problems started there, when he went to take the cutlery and the glass, because I noticed them greasy and with traces of dirt and I took a long time to choose mine. The garlic soup had to be ordered expressly, if not, they wouldn’t take it out (would they keep it from one day to another?). Then there were pasta spirals with an industrial fried tomato sauce directly poured out of the pot. And then, with some lettuce leaves, pork loins fillets that were like the sole of a alpargata (‘one or two?’), they asked you. “Two, man, two.”
When I went to bed, I thought that in such a place they could always offer the same menu because the clientele was renewed daily. I looked out of curiosity at the opinions on the Internet of pilgrims who had passed by (before the trip I had skipped those of this site, because I had intended to stay here in any case, to taste the soups). And that was when I understood it. That explained that there was no problem of places in the hostel. The hospitalier who was surprised by the little influx of that year, certainly had not read them.
09. San Juan de Ortega — Burgos (25.8 km)
I slept like a blessed man in the monastery of San Juan de Ortega, because of the tiredness and because the bedroom was spacious: undoubtedly I preferred to sleep with many people but in a large room with high ceilings, that not with fewer people and in a cubicle.
At about six a.m. some early morning caterers were already rumbling, and that there were no Asians (they usually didn’t stay in the shelters where they couldn’t use the kitchen, as was the case). I felt clear, so I got up too. By six and a half I was at the door of the hostel. People were leaving, but I, in principle, and more with the experience of the rugged departure from Santo Domingo, I preferred to wait at the first light of the day. I took a coffee with milk from the vending machine that was in reception and took it outside, sitting on a bench. I was calm, I had indeed made an ideal night to sleep in the open air. I looked into the starry sky, towards the Milky Way, and it came to mind “Compostela”.
Observing that the pilgrims were leaving finally hastened my march. I checked Google Maps where the next town was, Ages, and seeing that it was all straight down a track I told myself that there should be no problem. I tied the front flashlight to the head and, as if I were going on a special mission, I walked past the monastery lighting and penetrating into the darkness. Very soon I arrived at a junction where, although it seemed obvious where to go, pointing the light beam in different directions I looked for the yellow arrow that confirmed it to me. But there was some ambiguity in the signposting, so I began to doubt, I could not err in the dark and in the mountain. I took my mobile to orient myself back on the map and, between one thing and another, I reached someone who came from behind with the help of the two stumps that resonated alternately. It was the old man who had slept in the bunk below.
I had seen him for the first time in the previous day's stage, as he moved forward at some point (and that I was very slow): a man who was seventy-seven years old, tall and thin, with long grey beards and messy hair, with the suffering reflected on his face and walking with great difficulty. Well into the evening, when he appeared made a Christ in the bedroom of the hostel, I felt admiration for him and shame for my personal clothes during the stage. In his pitiful physical conditions and being like a foreigner, he seemed to trust in finding a place where he would sleep where he would arrive and at the time he would. I had just woken up from my light nap and watched him crawling through the room looking for a bunk. From below he was no longer free and decided on the top of where I was.
Like most, I also preferred the bunks below. I preferred to have the backpack accessible from the bed. It was also easier and less noisy to go to the bathroom in the middle of the night. Also, to use the ladder with barefoot and sore feet was not pleasant. For all this, I was glad when in San Juan de Ortega I occupied one of the ones below. And yet, I had already anticipated what had ended up happening, similar to when I get on an urban bus and I am happy to find a free seat, but at the same time I do not go relaxed because I might have to give it to someone more needy who would get up at the next stop.
"Thank you," the old man told me with a thread of voice that was both serious.
He neither smiled at me nor saw in him a gesture of relief or anything. He accepted what was offered to him, that was all. I quickly moved my things to the top bunk and he settled down with his slow movements.
Although we were berth neighbors we did not interact any more. Except once, minutes before the lights in the bedroom went out at night. He saw me struggling with a plug to leave charging my mobile phone, it was from a multiple shot whose pins were hard and it became difficult to fit it. As he struggled with it, the old man came to me, but by the time he reached my height I had already managed to connect it.
"Did you plug it in?" he asked.
- Yeah.
"Well," he said, and turning around he went to bed.
I was glad to have given you my bunk.
And in the morning, at that crossing at the exit of San Juan de Ortega, the old man did not hesitate where he was. So I pulled forward and left him behind again. On the track that crossed the pine forest in a straight line, lighting me with the front flashlight, sometimes I turned around and saw at a certain distance the focus of his and those of other pilgrims who came to the far behind. That reassured me and allowed me to enjoy my first walk alone at night in the mountain and under the stars. Three kilometers later, due to the fog that covered the valley, the lights of the streetlights of the urban centre of Agés appeared wrapped in halos. I began to clarify.
I had breakfast in the next village, in Atapuerca, and then I climbed the height of the same name, from whose summit was seen in the distance, surrounded by yellow fields, the city of Burgos. The situation was very similar to that that I had experienced arriving in Vitoria a week earlier: end of stage within sight (but there were still more than fifteen kilometers left!), warmth and eagerness to arrive, an increased craving for the vision of pilgrims who went more agile and would arrive at the hostel before me.
At that time, my foot had not yet started to bother me and it would have been a good opportunity to walk slowly and conscious of every step I took. I would have tried to find out what was wrong, to introduce small changes that could give me some indication of why my foot resented. And at the same time, I might have used this attentive disposition to relax and enjoy the places I was going through and to observe that absurd fear of staying away or not being up to others. Perhaps I could have done the exercise of trusting in what I had to be, as the old pilgrim I had known in San Juan de Ortega did.
But no, there was no way, that was stronger than me, so I made the same mistakes as always, I was overwhelmed and started running in a hijacking of mine and I left myself forgotten somewhere along the way. It happened at the height of Burgos airport; there, I could take an alternative route a little longer to enter the city by a grove by the river, instead of doing it by the official route, shorter, but crossing industrial polygons. I wish I could say that my choice was reasoned, that I took the longest way to enjoy the shadow of the bumps even though, because of the state of my already sore foot, it was the shortest one. But the truth is that all I did was follow those who were ahead of me. And the problem was that this alternative was not well marked, there were many yellow arrows missing from the "confirmation" arrows, which simply assure you that you were going well where you went. And since the ones ahead were going so fast that they escaped me, I did what was possible for not to lose sight of them forcing the passage.
Finally I lost them, but I was already in residential areas close to the city and it was easy to find someone to ask. My foot hurt, but I had put the autopilot, so I went full ahead along the paths of the riverbank that after a few kilometers flowed into a park of Burgos. Although there was no loss, I continually looked for the yellow arrows, I did not want to do a hundred meters more because of a loss. And then I noticed that these arrows appeared painted sometimes on the lampposts of the park, lamps whose design made them look like question marks. What a good photo for the blog!, I told myself, stopping instantly to pull it out and thinking of the text that would accompany it, in which I would relate the symbol of the doubt to the arrow as an answer.
At the end of the park I crossed the river over a bridge and found myself walking along the sidewalks of Burgos. As in Vitoria, I felt strange as I went dirty and looked like a vagrant among the citizens, as if I were a barbarian. I instinctively sought out those of my tribe, the pilgrims whom I distinguished from time to time among the crowds of the city center. And when I passed by them I almost shouted at them the “good Camino!” so that, despite the noise of the street and the noise of the traffic, they would hear me well and see me as one of their own; and some turned surprised because, now that I think about it, in an urban and normal setting like that, perhaps it would no longer be appropriate to greet themselves, and less with that impetus.
The municipal hostel of Burgos, located a few meters from the cathedral, was huge and there was no problem of squares. There I met Toni, whom I had not seen again from Belorado. At night it was a pleasure to dine again in his company in the dining room of the hostel. With the pre-cooked "warm up and ready" that we had bought in the afternoon in a super, we took some beer cans from a beverage machine. At one time he showed me his right forearm: in the inner part, a ristera of bites went up to him from the wrist to the elbow.
- What's that?
- Chinches. They also make their way, like us.
In the shelters they were fearsome, they stayed in the seats of the bunk beds and mattresses, waiting for the night to come to attack their victims. We brought them when they entered the bedroom after having walked in the countryside, so they made us leave the boots out, although we could also carry them in the backpacks or in the clothes.
Toni had been bitten in the parish of Belorado. And I remembered that there, he had taken an English pilgrim as a bunk neighbor (he pointed it out to me when we saw him passing through the street, it was Mahmud, who I will talk about later), that as soon as he arrived at the hostel he had laid down in bed just like that, without showering or anything, as if he had taken a walk in the country again. I told him that, incidentally, I had him that night as a neighbor from below.
- Oh, well, be careful.
I liked to retire early to update the blog before they turned off the lights (at ten) and stayed in the dark leaving my eyes with the mobile screen. But I often caught the bull and had no choice but to do so. It was just as tired, for me it was important to hang the photos with their brief notes without missing a single day, in this way I felt close to my family. And that the blog had configured it so that I did not admit comments from the readers, I did not want to be worried to respond and thank promptly to each compliment, or vice versa, hurt by the absence of them, these things always gave me a lot of energy. However, I knew that besides my wife, my father, father-in-laws, brothers and sisters-in-laws read me, because from time to time I received from them Wasaps in those who made me know and encouraged me. The truth was that in these daily chronicles I was exposing myself, perhaps because the distance allowed me to open, something I had never dared, even since I did not work and felt lost. And with their support, when I perceived their esteem, I was very motivated to continue.
That's why I was annoyed at myself like that morning running towards Burgos, because I was sure that that way I would miss things that I could then lead to my blog. And yet, I found it amazing that in the middle of those clouds they would open clear by those who appeared the ideas. That same night, when I tried to sleep thinking about the bedbugs that I didn't know if I would be the bearer of the man sleeping in the bunk downstairs, I got a couple of messages about my tickets on the lamppost in the form of a sign of interrogation and the feeling of belonging to the Camino tribe that I had experienced when I arrived in the city. I fell asleep feeling tucked in and without worrying more about the bedbugs.
At the crosses, the yellow arrows indicate which way to take. But there are also those like the one in the photo, which simply confirm that you are going well. As I am obsessed with not making mistakes, I seek them continually. And as I go a certain distance without seeing them, a disturbing question mark appears in my head. But, suddenly, an upward arrow appears that is like a hand with my thumb raised. And I feel comforted.
10. Burgos — Hornillos del Camino (21 km)
At about half past six in the morning, I went out through the door of the hostel in Burgos and went right to the bar opposite, an establishment whose clientele was basically pilgrim and had the same schedules. Upon entering, it gave me the feeling that there should be enough people having breakfast somewhere in the place, although at that time we were only two or three in the bar. I immediately understood why that impression: there were a good number of backpacks cornered in the corners. And not only backpacks, there were also travel bags (the Camino de Santiago with Samsonite suitcases!). With my coffee with milk in my hand, I came to look at what it put on the labels that hung from them. During the morning, those from the transport service of a company called Jacotrans would come to pick them up to take them to a hostel (private) in Hontanas, thirty kilometers from Burgos, where their owners would have reserved square and where they would be heading light with luggage.
I wasn’t going to go that far that day, the stages proposed by the guide I was driving were closer to the twenty kilometers than to the thirty. Moreover, I wasn’t in a position to walk so much, because the problem of the foot was not only still there, but it seemed to get worse: just as in previous days the discomfort had appeared after the first kilometers, this time it started to hurt me to just take the first steps at the exit of the bar. I went through the head of the transport service, it wasn’t anything expensive and sure that without charge my foot would recover immediately. But I dismissed it immediately because it seemed like a sacrilege, before that I preferred to stop to rest in some hostel one day or two and then go looking.
It was important for me to carry my things. It allowed me to be aware of what I had difficulty carrying them and to value them (taking care of them) to the extent that I needed them. In this way I saw more clearly the burden that the «just in case» assumed. Before leaving home I had already done the exercise of including only the indispensables. Really I could not do without anything else? I began to caress the idea of getting rid of a raincoat that would shelter me in case I cooled down during the trip. It was the only thing I had to put myself above the only sweatshirt that I wore. As I had weighed it before leaving home, I knew that throwing it away would free me of about 600 grams.
Since I had started to hurt my foot, I was obsessed with what I put in my backpack. Weight was a decisive factor in selecting the food I bought for the next day’s stage (to the point that in the balance of the fruit shop I weighed taking a banana or another one, depending on its weight). The previous afternoon I had gone to a pharmacy in Burgos to get ibuprofen for the swelling of the foot. I asked for the smallest container they had and, when the pharmacist gave me the box with the pills, the first thing I did was to look for what I weighed in the description of the product. Reading “600” I was scared, because in my obfuscation, for a moment, I related it to the 600 grams of the raincoat, before placing myself and seeing that that figure referred to the composition of the medicine in milligrams.
Some took Voltaren for inflammation and muscle pain. An Irish woman my age named Fran, when she asked me how it was and told her that my foot hurt, told me she had been taking it for a couple of days.
"And nothing hurts me anymore," she said.
I was resting on a bank that was in the shade at Rabé de las Calzadas, and she sat next to me drinking water from the bottle that she had just filled at the fountain. We had seen each other the day before, in my bewildered race along the alternative road to Burgos, was one of those of the group I had hardly followed.
Fran told me he was happy because since he took Voltaren he felt phenomenal, so that he would be able to cross the plateau quickly, arriving in Leon in six days.
"I'm doing the Road in stages," he said. "In just over a week I have to go back to work and my plan is to take it back on the next vacation I may have in spring to finish it.
That is why she was extending the stage to Hontanas, the same place the backpacks she had seen at the bar first hour. In my case, getting to Leon would take me two more days, eight in total. I thought that I too would take less time, especially because the stretch between Burgos and Leon was supposed to be the heaviest, with the sun and heat they announced for the next few days and the monotony of the desolate landscapes. Also, I was feeling somewhat discouraged. I remembered what I had read about what was happening in the second week of travel, when the initial enthusiasm and adrenaline injection gave way to the fatigue accumulated by the daily walks, the discomforts and the bad sleep in the shelters. Not to mention the pains. Because of this, what I was supposed to have in the next days had something of «crossing the desert».
There was also some western view of these landscapes. From the hill of which Hornillos del Camino was accessed, there was a sensational view. Under the noon sun, the path that went down undulating to the village was white. Hornillos appeared in the distance between dry fields and a few trees, and in the background there were hills with eroded white rock slopes. Only the horses were missing.
It says Gregorio Morán in I will never get to Santiago that when they arrived in this town, in the early nineties, it was like getting into a Western movie, composed only of a long and deserted street. When I did, Hornillos was still a street, but it was invaded by a multitude of pilgrims who were occupying the different shelters along it.
I went directly to the municipal, which was where I would find Toni. I had decided that I would no longer get more complicated with the subject of accommodation: I would always go to the public (where you could not reserve), to whom I would play in each place. So I would avoid the work of looking at opinions, doubting where to go each time, whether I should book or not, it would be too much time that I would lose going around these things. Besides, after my experience in Belorado (very cuckoo he), it seemed to me that I would not know how to take advantage of his benefits and it is not that I would be assured a good rest, which was the only thing that I needed.
At the reception, a young Senegalese probably attended me because he was wearing the shirt of this country’s football team. He sealed my badge, took my data and asked me if I wanted to sign up for breakfast the next day, at the price of three euros.
"I don't know about this," I said.
The truth is that I preferred to go to a bar and drink my coffee with milk with whatever it was, it was one of my little pleasures. But I was in a hurry to be inconsiderate telling him directly that no, that boy sure needed the income he was getting from this type of service. He could have told me to think about it, but instead he stared at me, waiting for me to decide. I was making myself uncomfortable.
"It is because of you," he said. "Keep in mind that in the morning you will have nothing until the next town, Hontanas, ten kilometers from here.
I would have liked to find out for myself, to ask later in the bars of the village at what time they opened. But I kept sticking my eyes and noticed the uneasiness that was coming up, so I said yes, that all right, I didn't want to make a world out of it (and yes, let me go instead).
In the bedroom I found Toni, freshly showered and combed.
"I made pole," he laughed alone. "Pole position: I finally arrived first at the shelter," he said, pointing out the name of his bunk bed number one.
He waited for me to settle down and, after shaving, showering, giving me cream on my feet, washing the clothes and laying it, we both went to the bar next door to Casa Manolo. We took the beer bottle outside, on a bench, next to some locals with cachava sitting in the cool, and we began to look, as if a cycling race were concerned, at the straggled pilgrims. Suddenly, we heard someone singing a serenade up the street. They were two Italians who instead of carrying backpacks, were pushing (or pulling away) carts that looked like a joke. One of them, with long grey beards, shouted “Andiamo a Santiago!”, and alternated it by singing with a tenor’s voice the ‘O sole mio’. And I said it. When I went to take a photo they posed smiling for me and then they followed to Hontanas, with the laziness I made.
The municipal hostel of Hornillos was very small, a stone house with cubic shape, on one floor with basement, almost hitting the church. In fact, in the afternoon, looking for some calm and cool, I went with my notebook to write to the church, as if one more dependency of the hostel was. Then, once made “the duties”, I was already free to make social life.
Being next to Toni facilitated interaction with the other pilgrims. That night, for dinner, we shared some white beans and a chicken that was already roasted in its container. In the narrow dining room with kitchen of the hostel, we stood at the common table where they were dining half a dozen Asians, all women except a man. At first I thought they would all be Korean, but some were addressing others in English.
"Have you really confused me with a Korean?" asked Emika, who was Japanese, when I told her.
We started chatting because Toni already knew her, at some point of the day they had coincided. I was delighted with her because she was a young and smiling girl and spoke a perfect Spanish having studied philology in Salamanca. Emika was traveling along with another Japanese friend. At the table there was also a Taiwanese one and the rest were Koreans.
On the other corner sat the only man in the group accompanied by his wife, both dining with their cans of beer of half a liter. When they finished, the man, always laughing, mixed the leftover white rice with some algae brought from Korea and made with it a ball, then wrapped it in transparent film of kitchen.
"This, very good breakfast!" he said, raising his thumb and gnashing his eyes even more as he smiled.
At one point a very white-skinned, Irish blonde woman came into the dining room who had a vegetarian restaurant bar at the end of the street (The Green Tree). She told us that we could have dinner at her place, or seen that we had already had dinner, had a drink and shared with other pilgrims a song, a talk in a pleasant atmosphere.
I went out to sit on one of the chairs by the door of the shelter, while the sunset light turned golden like the fields around the village. On my right I went, as one who did not want the thing, to a woman who was Finnish, who told me that she had brought her two nieces to make the Camino as a gift for her recent graduation in high school. I had already seen them there, were two very blond girls who were always attached to Dante, the seductive 20th-year-old son of an Argentine girl named Marta, with whom I also exchanged a few words shortly afterwards.
On my left was José Manuel, a seventy-three-year-old Gaditan who said he was doing the Camino for stages. This time he had just started in Burgos and ended up in León. In this way he combined the French Way with the Via de la Plata, which he was also walking, alternating them to advance for both in parallel.
Later I spoke to my wife on the phone. I conveyed to her my enthusiasm for this extraordinary diversity, it was to freak out considering that, in addition, we were in a Spanish town lost and with little mobile coverage.
"You're not going to believe it," I said, "in the room we even have a retired couple representing "Marriage scenes", in this small hostel we all seem to enter.
The truth is that there I met for the first time a few whom I would continue to greet during much of the trip. With some I did not even cross a word, but I would remember that it had been at Hornillos where I had initially seen them. And, that night, when I got into my sleeping bag, I felt integrated. I did not remember about the crossing of the desert.



At the bottom Hornillos del Camino. It looks like the landscape of a western. Many pilgrims refer to the Castilian plateau (the Burgos-León stretch) as “the desert”. It coincides with the second week of Camino, when the impulse of novelty decays and fatigue and doubts arise.



Sitting in the cool on a bench in Hornillos, we see people of all kinds passing by. These two horny Italians pulled their carts singing the 'O sole mio'. And so much so that sun. They continued on their way despite the evening lull.




Emma, the Irishwoman at The Green Tree restaurant, inviting the group of Asians in the dining room of the Hornillos hostel to come to her place for a Guinness. The diversity of people is extraordinary in this lost Castilian village.

11. Hornillos del Camino — Castrojeriz (19.9 km)
For those aiming at breakfast, the manager had left everything ready since the day before, so he did not need to come so early. At the dining table, several bowls rested face down on his dishes. Coffee was soluble, milk was heated in the microwave and there were biscotes and cookies maria.
"Do you want to, Toni?" I told him by offering him a cookie.
- Ha ha, no thanks, I got it.
Sitting next to me, Toni had his own biscuits for breakfast (I also had mine in my backpack), but, for the rest, I was taking the same thing as I did because we had offered him the Nescafé bottle and the milk box, there was plenty left over. The day before, after telling him that I had signed up for breakfast (he didn't do it), I had suggested that I take a look online at the criticism that a user made of it.
He gave me a little anger; not for the money (or not only), but because others had been smarter than me. But anyway, I said to myself, these things could happen from the moment I had decided not to spend time looking at opinions. However, for Toni it was not the question. He considered that the public shelter had to be, precisely, the place where that spirit of solidarity that was being lost on the Road, a space to share (he was the first to offer his food); so that morning he saw no problem in having breakfast with everyone and everyone, even without having paid.
And in this same line of distributing what is there, he was a devotee of the drawers of exchange of objects that almost all the shelters installed in some corner along with the motto: “Leave what you get, take what you need”. I always took a look at them. (A few days earlier, in one of these places there had been some templates for the shoes.) As in Hornillos there was also, after breakfast I waited for Toni to leave before I approached my raincoat in the hand to the corner where this box was. In the forecast of the time for the next days they gave all suns, so I deposited there with care my dear waterproof, perfectly folded. Without being ceremonious, I wanted my gesture to be like an offering, because I was sorry to deliver a garment that had accompanied me for years. But it was the only thing that I had in the backpack that could be considered a “if just”. I would see what to do in case the bad time I reached there by the Bierzo or Galicia.
I set out before dawn, like practically everyone else. I was picking up the taste of going out at night with the stars, until I clarified and the flashlight was no longer needed and then the sky became red and the sun finally appeared. The dirt and gravel road was white and was surrounded by the desert landscape of the fields of harvested cereals. On the edges were accumulated the stones removed by the farmers from their crops; with them, the pilgrims, in a joint and anonymous action, had been raising small mounds that gave a sacred character to the road.
After an undulation of the land, a soft hollow opened at the bottom, with a beautiful woodland indicating the existence of a stream. There must have been the well-known refuge of San Bol. That greenery pointed to an oasis in the middle of the desert and, however, upon arriving at the deviation, I did not travel the two hundred and fifty meters that separated me from it to take a look.
But it was very slow and I didn’t want to walk more than strictly necessary. I thought I was noticing the effect of going lighter without the six hundred grams of the raincoat, because my foot didn’t hurt so much anymore. Besides, I didn’t carry any more food than a couple of pieces of fruit and had left the hostel with the bottle of water half filled.
In Hontanas, due to the desire for good lunch, I barely got into the first bar offered to the pilgrim, one that had a beautiful terrace at the entrance of the village. But I remembered that unwritten rule for tourist places that says we have to go to the second, never to the first. So I followed a little later and in one that was called El Puntido, I took a ration of tortilla with a coffee with milk.
On the way out of town, I noticed the number of swallows that had been spinning in large flocks above the houses. Despite the good weather they were preparing to migrate, autumn we already had it on us.
A little later I heard someone calling from behind. It was Toni, who came almost running, all sweaty with the cap visor turned back and with the cane as if it were a spear. It seemed to be in combat mode.
"But what happened to you?"I asked him surprised that he had fallen behind.
"Nothing, when I left Hornillos, I was talking to Marta, the Argentine, and I'm sure we've missed some arrow because we're lost," she said with her voice cut off by the effort.
Now I had to make up for lost time and he stepped me forward without slowing his speed at any time, as if he was taking part in a background test.
A little further on, the dirt road was passed to a regional road flanked by trees in a fertile area next to a stream. «And suddenly the miracle of San Antón occurs», writes Gregorio Morán in his Never arrive in Santiago:
[...] the remains of a medieval convent. It crosses the road in such a way that cars and walkers must pass under that ojival arch, brush the Gothic ruins in a painful state, inseparable from the road to which they give an air of legend of Bécquer or travel stamp to Byron. A 20th century road that passes under an ecclesial arcade of the XIV! The dream of a mad architect.
Here I turned a few meters away to see the ruins inside. I bordered the semi-ruined walls of the convent until I found the entrance door to what was the church and today it is an open sky courtyard with gravel floor, tables, benches and some vegetation. Against the inner walls stood a small constructions, perhaps old sheds that had been restored to now serve as a shelter. It was closed when I arrived, but from the door hung a handwritten note that said:
Bienvenid@s. There are 12 beds, dinner and community breakfast. There is no electricity. But there is the magic of this jewel. If you want to stay, put yourself on the list. We return later.
It was signed by “The Hospitallers”, and on the sheet they had drawn emoticons of smiling faces, hearts and a symbol of peace. Two people had already signed up, one of them perhaps was the young man who rested on one of the tables. Otherwise, I was alone. I sat on some steps that in his day should have served to access the altar of the church. It sounded in the atmosphere a chamber music at a very low volume, no idea where it came from. I stayed there for a while, absorbing that calm and reading on the Internet about the history of that place.
In the Middle Ages, the monks of that convent treated those affected by the "fire of St. Anthony", also called "fire of hell", a disease caused by the intake of bread contaminated by a fungus, the hornet. The only remedy known then was to go on pilgrimage to Santiago, for the care they offered in places like this and because thus they replaced rye bread (the most polluted and habitual in Europe), with that of clean wheat candeal. Poisoning by the fungus was like a bad trip after taking a trip (hence the hell), followed by gangrenes in the extremities and mutilations.
I stopped reading. I went back to the road and discovered that the music I had been hearing was from a bar with a terrace set in a corral in front of the convent. There was no one there either. The problem was that everything was very close to Castrojeriz and I had to compete with people’s eagerness to finish the stage. The village was within sight and, yes, it happened to me as always in these cases: that the last stretch became eternal to me.
"You know, there are only a few places left," Pascual urged me when he saw me coming to the shelter in my wake. He let me go with the tone of a father's own counterclaim drawing attention to his son.
Pascual, of the retired couple of the Hornillos shelter, was a Valencian who the day before had given us the presents with typical scenes of Spanish marriage of his age. Amparo, his wife, prepared the dinner standing, composing the salad at the same time that warmed up what was second, while he waited sitting at the table with the headphones on, since he had left the Champions. In the room he broadcast everything he did, what he had to do, as telling himself more than his wife, who kept quiet. These were questions of the kind: the mobile put to load, the blanket by hand if he cooled at night, remember to give himself the cream...; and also the count of what was good to them as a result of his foresight and good judgment. At family meetings he was sure to play the role of “broño” very well.
This “spabila” felt fatal to me, what he knew how I was doing that day. But in that advice (which sounded in me as a warning) he also guessed his uncontrollable need to control reality, even that of others, to prevent it from hurting us. Because in Castrojeriz’s shelter we repeated practically the same ones as in Hornillos’s and that already made us a family.
After dinner, at sunset, I sat on one of the benches with tables outside. I went out with my notebook to see if I wrote, although there were many people taking the fresco and the Spaniards were chatting loudly from one side of the terrace. I took off my sandals to give me a little air on my feet, and on one of these, Pascual looked and exclaimed alarmed:
- But did you see how swollen your foot is?
Indeed, I had it a little inflamed, it had been like this for a few days, but it didn’t seem to be that bad. José Manuel, the Gaditan, approached me:
- Kid, but if you have to blow it up, doesn't it hurt?
"But what do you do without putting on ice?" said Pascual.
I was right. In the freezer in the fridge there were bags of gel to apply cold and I had not even considered it, out of ignorance, neglect and, ultimately, fear of admitting my condition.
And then they started to put fear in my body. Pascual told me to rest a couple of days, to go see the doctor, that if I didn't reduce the swelling immediately that would break me and I would have to go home.
"And you ran out of the Way," he added conclusively, saying, "See what happens?
In addition, I should do as his wife and he, who sent the backpacks with Jacotrans so as not to make them suffer at their feet, did not know how well they were doing.
José Manuel for his part, seeing that the part of the Achilles tendon had been inflamed and as it also hurt a little there, told me to go straight home.
"Go home, listen to me, that's what happened to me, I went home and in two or three days I was fine. Go home," he said, "get well and then come back and keep doing the Road, listen to me, it's the best."
"Come on, take that ice off," Pascual said to me after a while with his bag stuck to his foot; I noticed a point of disdain in his gesture, as if he was talking to a child who had to tell everything.
Maybe they were right and I couldn't go on. Even though it wasn't even nine o'clock at night, I lay in bed ready to sleep.
Soon Toni appeared, that night he had it under him again, as a bunk neighbor.
"Here, give yourself this cream on my foot," he said, holding a tube for me. "And don't fucking listen to them. The further south, the more exaggerated.
He recommended that I rest and the next day be quiet, see how it is.
- And don't eat the pot, which is worse.
"Moreover," he added, "you can always amputate your foot.
As I waited to fall asleep I remembered that I was comforted thinking that, despite how much everyone seemed to know there, only I had stopped to visit the inner courtyard of the convent of Saint Anton that day.



Ruins of the convent of San Antón. On the left the refuge of pilgrims attached to the walls. «There is no electricity», puts at the door, «but there is the magic of this jewel». They gave community dinner, I imagine that between candles. I had to have stayed. But I decided to follow. With the mystery of these decisions one forms his particular Way.



Common room in the Castrojeriz municipal hostel. Indeed it is not a hotel. How do you get the sleeping together, men and women, strangers, snorers? The only thing I can say is that you get into the dynamics, and that getting exhausted helps you not to be aware and to rest, which is what it is about.
12. Castrojeriz — Frómista (24.7 km)
In Castrojeriz’s hostel, breakfast was a donation. Almost everyone had left already or were about to leave when I went to the dining room to have coffee with coffee and what was left of bread and jam. I noticed a small bookcase with books that were next to the table. In almost all the hostels there was a minilibrary with novels in different languages, subbeds and left there by the pilgrims. I had not brought home any books, for the weight and because, moreover, it was not certain that I would read it. Least of all, because I would have had to leave it like those that I had now beside me. There was one that was a pilgrim’s diary, a self-editation. I browsed it. In the chapter that dedicated to the stage of that day, it was worth getting up early to not miss the sunrise from the Alto de Mostellaros.
I left the hostel at seven and arrived at the Upper just in time to see it, at eight. I realized that in my case, and at those heights of September, it was just the opposite of what I had read: thanks to the fact that I had not made up the landscape too much I could appreciate the panorama at the time when the sun was rising. At the top we found a dozen people admiring the magnificent views. Where were those who had slept in my hostel? I did not see anyone known. Some would be very advanced in the stage, which I wanted to say that they had gone there still at night. At four in the morning the group of Koreans had left, at five had sounded several alarms of alarm, at six practically all the world was preparing. Definitely, the phenomenon of the madrugs and the desire to get soon to the goal I had not planned them before the journey. It was also said that it was to avoid the heat.
I arrived at the chapel of San Nicolás, located just before the bridge over the Pisuerga River, on the border between the provinces of Burgos and Palencia. At the entrance door to the church they had extended a large Italian flag. The Confraternita di San Jacobo di Compostella, an association of Perugia, was in charge of managing the shelter enabled within the Romanesque temple. I looked up to see it inside, but I heard very loud talk in Italian and seemed to be invading a space outside and so I did not enter.
By chance that same day, a little later, I saw another flag, this time Korean. Despite the great diversity of nationalities represented in this space of pilgrimage, there were hardly any flags and that's why they caught my attention, as if they did not correspond. At most there was someone who wore some small badge sewn to the backpack, like a sticker in the back of the car. Therefore, when suddenly a Korean came forward to my right at full speed, with the flag of his country behind his back and tied to his neck, the way athletes turn around the stadium when they win a race, I couldn't help but laugh and quickly took a picture of him.
I realized that I was barely feeling pain. Maybe Toni’s cream was working, I had also applied it in the morning before leaving. When I put on my shoes, he gave me to leave the shoe almost untied, to give him a break to the foot, since in total, I was going to walk very slow.
To celebrate the improvement, I would not take my time eating a coffee with milk with tortilla pincho in Itero de la Vega. And so, little by little, through a landscape of yellow fields and under a sun of justice, I arrived to the stretch that runs next to the Channel of Castile under the discontinuous shadow of the trees. The only vision of the water was already refreshing because, moreover, it announced the proximity of the end of the stage. It was almost two in the afternoon and at those hours very few pilgrims were seen. In fact, there was hardly anyone else! Bad sign. And then, just as I would say the day I was going to San Juan de Ortega, I was invaded by the agorous thoughts related to the availability of accommodation in Frómista. If I practically walked alone at those hours, it was then that the whole world had arrived already. And if the previous day I had occupied one of the last squares in the municipal hostel of Castrojeriz, why would I not find myself filled with the shelter in Frómista, arriving later? Just like that time, I started to convince myself that I would sleep outside.
There were plenty of squares. I breathed. Anyone understood it. Apparently the people had spread out in other villages (Toni, for example, had thrown until the next one and some Asians who carried a lot of weight in their backpacks had stayed in the previous one). On the other hand, the shelter of Frómista was larger, something I had not seen. The hospital nurse assigned me a bunk in a small room where I would sleep together with five other people.
At five o’clock they opened Frómista’s pharmacy and there I went, on time, to get some anti-inflammatory cream like Toni had left me the day before. Also, I wanted someone who really knew about these things to take a look at my foot, I was sick of so much pseudo shelter expert who “knows” and tells you what you should do.
"Of course, of course, everyone knows and has it very clear," the pharmacist said ironically.
He made me sit in a chair. My foot was still slightly swollen, but I saw it better. I told him I didn’t understand, that the last few days I hadn’t forced the march.
"Now," he replied with the tired gesture of the one who has repeated it hundreds of times, "you think that from one day to the next you throw all those kilos behind your back, and you start walking every day all those miles, and you still think that the body will not protest. Ha!
With his white coat, he was a man in the fifties, of serious expression. I thought that, by the place where his pharmacy was located, over the years he must have attended to many pilgrims like me. Scrutinizing my foot he asked me if the footwear was just in size. I told him no, that foreseeing that my feet would swell because of the heat, he had bought me some slippers of a greater number than he normally wore.
"Then you may be tying your laces too hard.
Right! It was that! I saw it clearly as soon as he said it. I was tying them to death from the beginning, to prevent him from dancing my foot inside the shoe and rubbing me. In fact, I had hardly had to wear the Band-Aids and congratulated me because no blister had come out. But I understood that the man had hit the nail because, just during that stage, I had carried the Slipper quite loose and had noticed a clear improvement.
- Did you stop by the convent of Saint Anton yesterday?
When he said yes, he explained to me about ergotism, the disease popularly known as fire from hell or from San Antonio. Apparently, the fungus, in addition to causing hallucinations, had vasoconstrictive effects that reduced blood flow in the extremities.
"Exactly what you were causing yourself by binding yourself so strongly. Luckily, the tissue has not reached the point of gangrene and it will not have to be amputated," he said in a sorna, but without altering at any time his serious gesture.
He gave me a gel. To lower the swelling I had to apply it to myself after putting my feet in cold water. Nothing more, that would be enough. I went back to the shelter and took one of the buckets used to wash clothes and, after filling it with fresh water in the laundry room, I sat on a chair in the yard and soaked my feet. Then I let them dry for a while in the sun and, when I was ready to give myself the cream, I looked at a little wound that had started to come out on a side, near the heel. It was my first blister.



I see dawn from the Alto de Mostellares thanks to the fact that I haven’t gotten too early. Most of my fellow lodgers have missed it. It’s a bit of crazy, some get up at 4 or 5 and do much of the night stage, like zombies with flashlights. They say to avoid the heat. And the landscape?, questions. The stars!, answer you.



In the Alto de Mostellares, the small piles of stones that are seen along the Way (the largest of which would be that of Cruz de Ferro) could not be lacking. Pilgrims who pass by bring a stone or leave in them a message, a poem, a photo, an object. It is a way to communicate something, almost always a pain.



A Korean with the flag of his country behind me is ahead of me from the right. It is not a usual image, you hardly see flags. And this is something magnificent considering the variety of countries from which pilgrims come. It is exciting to think that so many diverse people can share an activity, without needing to highlight their national identity.



The Channel of Castile was built to transport goods. But between one thing and another it caught the train, and with this new invention the channel became obsolete before being completely finished. Today, completely alienated, it serves to take boat rides and refresh the view of the walker who arrives in Frómista.
13. Frómista — Carrión de los Condes (18.8 km)
There were six of us in the small room of the Framista hostel where I spent the night. Underneath my bunk was Pilar, a burgalese lady of about sixty years who said to travel some stretch of the Camino every year. She liked to chat and, before bedtime, gave me her recipe to avoid swollen feet and blisters, she was also an expert. There were also two Italians, mother and daughter, and a couple of middle-aged Dutch robusts who had appropriated two lower bunks.
As soon as the light went out, the man began to snore loudly. They were the strongest snoring that I had ever heard, to scare, I would even say that they made the walls of the small room tremble. I worried immediately because it was clear that it would be impossible to sleep like this. Pilar made the relevant flutters with the tongue, but the man was not immutable, he was deeply asleep. The discomfort that was breathing in the environment was increasing, they heard more and more sighs and snoring. The Italian mother, who was in the top bunk of the snorer, knocked the wall. She also did not do anything because she slept and she also began to snore, although with the sweat, the tissue was sticking to my back. The frames of the bunks squeaked because we did not stop turning around in the bed. The Dutch woman did nothing because she slept and she too began to snore, although less than her husband. Pilar rant loudly saying that that this was waterless.
I cursed that man, how did it happen to him to share such a small room? I had heard that in some shelters they asked you if you were a professional snorer, because they had rooms reserved for them. And it was at that time that I realized: I also snored. I knew it for my wife, of course, and also for Toni, that I had let him fall in Salvatierra. Much, little? I wasn’t sure; I assumed that not so much, although it would depend on the night. And then I was worried to fall asleep and start snoring myself too, that would be too much for Pilar and the Italians. But I needed to rest, I didn’t have a new walk the next day and if I didn’t rest I would resent my foot. I started to have defeatist thoughts: the bad sleeping of the shelters would end with me and I would send myself back home. I felt trapped. I needed some earplugs, I didn’t carry them with me because I was upset. And then, out of pure desperation, it occurred to me to make a pair of balls with the one I left: a clique.
I woke up at six o’clock, rested. I had slept like a log. I noticed my mouth very dry, oy. And besides, I was lying face up. I was scared: I too must have snored. The Dutch, lighting up with a flashlight, picked up their things to leave with nocturnity. Pilar and the Italians seemed to sleep peacefully. I got out of the bunk making as little noise as possible with the intention of sneaking away from there. Minutes later, in the hallway, when I was tying (without too much squeeze) the shoelaces, suddenly the door of the room opened. It was Pilar, with huge shiners. You caught me.
"What a night, I haven't had an eye," he said. "It's been exaggerated, isn't it?
"Well, yes," I said timidly.
Then she realized my discomfort.
"Because you also snored," that "you" sounded like a shot to me, "but nothing to do with that man.
Ugh, I felt some relief.
After that I saw Pilar no longer. I saw the Italians from time to time on the way, I had a hurry to greet them, but judging by their faces they did not seem to hold a grudge against me. As for the Dutch, these I met again, later.
The road between Frómista and Carrión de los Condes was a walkway with long straight sections next to a road connecting several villages of the region of Tierra de Campos. The road was regularly marked by pillars with a yellow scallop on a blue background and, although it was not paved, it reminded me of the bidegorris of my land, perhaps because I entered the morning I crossed with some ladies who had gone out to walk in a direction contrary to that of the pilgrims.
Shortly afterwards I reached the Taiwanese woman I had met in the Asian dining room of the Hornillos shelter, named Shan Lee (or something similar). I was too slow, taking short steps with the help of his two walking sticks, conscientious and without diverting my gaze from the road. He protected himself from the sun with long pants and sleeve shirt that covered even the back of his hands. He had an oriental peasant air with his hat, which, although it was not conical, carried him very deep with the wing falling all around. His voluminous backpack had to weigh excessively for how small she was, because, with every step he took, he swayed to the sides giving a small shaking to his body.
Upon reaching her height I greeted her and, as I asked her how she was doing, she told me that she had blisters and they were hurting her a lot. Then I realized that I was going well for the first time in almost a week and I felt sorry for her. I told her that much encouragement, since the stage was very short and simple, and that we would see each other later in the hostel.
I left it behind, and a few kilometers later I began to see in the distance the last village that had before arriving to Carrión de los Condes. The walk was being a walk, I could not believe it. As I advanced I was struck by the immense mole of the church of that town, with a giant rosette and disproportionate dimensions with respect to the houses that surrounded it. That was Villalcázar de Sirga and when I reached his height I was clear that it was worth visiting. But for that it was necessary to deviate to the village, a few hundred meters away, because the Camino de Santiago was still straight next to the road. And once again, I went through the head not to do it and follow the tide of pilgrims that ahead of me were looking for the end of stage, about five kilometers. It was like the force of a river whose current drags you. But, I did not, I said, that day I felt well and took it as a moral obligation, so I managed to leave its course and spent an hour to visit the monument and then I took my coffee with milk and pincho de tortilla in front the bar.
Then I went back to the waters of the torrent and, as I was reaching the end, I reached Shan Lee again, who kept moving forward with his short steps. His uncrowded face showed the suffering and I decided to accompany her for the last few meters to the hostel. On the streets of Carrión de los Condes we met Toni, who had already settled, showered and combed and was going to buy a super.
"Come on, I'll walk you to the shelter." "And going to Shan Lee," and you, give me the backpack, I'll take it to you.
The girl told him that there was no need, «no problem, thank you».
"But if you can't deal with your soul, please," he insisted.
The truth is that despite his virtually null English, Toni managed to communicate and had something he could call "enchanto", especially with the girls. But Shan Lee did not think he was for nonsense and at most we should have been reliable enough, because he gave him his backpack with a polite smile (or maybe it was the rictus of pain).
"Fuck, but what are you wearing here?" said Toni, checking the weight of the backpack, which at first was informally hung from a strip, but then he had to put it straight using both of them because "he was going to screw his shoulder."
In the Holy Spirit shelter, inside the convent of the Congregation of nuns of the Daughters of Charity, they had everything perfectly organized. After the registration, a nun accompanied the pilgrims to assign them the bed (they were not bunk beds, but beds!) and teach them the facilities by raising their voice a lot, so that foreigners who did not know Spanish also understood it.
That day had gone well; the stage had been short and I had walked at my pace, carefully and at ease. Moreover, I had taken my time to visit a church and yet I had arrived at the hostel at a reasonable hour. I thought that this is how it should always be. After shaving, showering, giving me cream on my feet, washing my clothes and tending it, it was still time to eat, so I went out to look for a restaurant with a menu of the day. Once I had eaten I went back to the room to rest in bed. And it was a little later, when I got up with the intention of writing on the table that was in the middle of the bedroom, when I gave myself a scare of death: I was there, just a couple of beds away: the Dutch snorer of Frómista. At that time the pharmacy must have been opened, so I jumped out to buy some good earplugs.
I spent the afternoon doing some sightseeing around Carrión de los Condes, I visited the monastery of San Zoilo. On my way back to the hostel, I installed myself on one of the tables with chairs in the courtyard of the convent. It had been made somewhat late for the standards of the Way, the people withdrew. It seemed to me that it was darker earlier than usual, it was clear that I was shortening the day. At a few tables away I was sitting the Italian with long grey beards that as I passed by Hornillos sang for the whole world the 'O sole mi.' I was alone and circumspect, with my feet in a bucket of water, was the vivid image of desolation. Happy nights, sad mornings (or rather the reverse), I thought, remembering the play I had on that day.
Shan Lee showed up and sat down with me at the table. He had another face, he said it was all controlled and he could continue the next day. At noon, when he arrived at the hostel, he had proposed to accompany her to the health center, but apparently it was not necessary. Now he was smiling and dressed in light clothes and flip flops, like a summerer. I asked him if he knew where Toni was.
"He went to mass with the Japanese," he said.
Well, we had become pious the man, wanting to receive the blessing of the pilgrim. They would, of course, be Emika and her friend interested in coming and Toni would have lent herself to accompany them.
"And how are you doing? Have you met many Chinese doing the Path?" I asked.
I felt like I was a little lonely, even though it might be just because of her shyness.
"Very few," he replied.
-Least bad.
He frowned, without understanding. “He asked me why I said it.”
"For if you begin to come the Chinese as the Koreans come, the Path is over. We cannot fit."
By letting go of the occurrence I had become a bit bordered, but Shan Lee did not take it personally. He did not even remind me that she was Taiwanese.
"I have read the famous Korean book that made the Path popular in Korea, they have translated it into Chinese.
But this time I said nothing. That, the reading of that book that had seduced so many Koreans, explained his presence there. He then added that he was taking a break in his life.
"I'm between jobs," he said.
Although it is rare in Spanish, "in between jobs" was the expression he used, something like "between one job and the next".
"I too," I said, and the truth is that this approach sounded good to me.
And besides, it was true. I had also opened a parenthesis in my life. The bad thing is I didn't know how to close it.



Between Frómista and Carrión, dirt walker by the road and tunnel practiced through a weeping willow. It is a good example of two things that characterize the Camino: its basic character, without paving, and also the feeling that behind there is "someone" who cares about its maintenance helping the pilgrim.
14. Carrión — Terradillos de los Templarios (26.3 km)
I don’t know if there were snoring or not in the convent’s bedroom, because I put the plugs just as I put in the sack and here peace and then glory. In the morning I was one of the last to leave the room, and that was still very early. Toni waited for me at the door, but we only went together to the first bar that we found open in the same Carrión, there we took the coffee and at the exit I exaggerated a very slow step to facilitate its take-off.
The stage had a peculiarity: the first stretch consisted of an endless straight line of about seventeen kilometers in which there was no village, nothing. It turned out very monotonous because around there was only plain field. I walked and walked, and for the time that I took to travel it I calculated that I was going to four kilometers per hour, apparently quite slow because I was constantly ahead.
So, after about four hours of walking along a dirt track, the last of them under a sun that was already pressing, it gave me great joy to finally see a bell tower in the distance. Indeed that was Calzadilla de la Cueza, but until I reached his height I did not see the houses because the people were in a deep hole.
At the entrance there were two establishments. I decided for the one on the right, which seemed the least crowded, a bar-albergue-restaurant called Los Canarios. I asked for a cane with an omelette skewer, and when a while later I went to the bar to pay I looked at the ads that had nailed a cork panel to the wall. Among them was a paper napkin with the following poem written to a pen:
From the pit wherein the people lie,
At a distance the bell tower looks out
between fields of a calm sea of land,
As in the murky waters of a swamp.
Piece of poem that had marked the inspired that had passed by before me. I was resounding and everything when I read it. I took a picture of it and, as I reread these verses later, it gave me the feeling that, despite their gravity, they reflected quite well what I had seen when arriving that morning to Calzadilla de la Cueza.
At about two o’clock in the afternoon I arrived at Terradillos de los Templarios and went to the Jacques de Molay hostel (so called in honor of the last Grand Master of the Order of Temple), a name that sounded very chic in the middle of the Spanish moor. Two young Germans were waiting at the reception for me a little earlier. The hospitalier hung up the phone and confirmed that in the Moratinos hostel, just over three kilometres away, they had free seats for them. They left.
"Have you reserved?" the woman asked me next.
- No.
"Well, you'll have the last place.
"Well, that's a shame. There's no way I'll stay out," I thought with a scab (I once had the bed secured).
"Well, how lucky I am," I replied, however.
The shocking thing was that, for once, I was caught unconcerned, because, for some reason, I had not anticipated such a contingency. And that Terradillos was a delicate stage ending to go on a plan like mine, because the two hostels in the village were private and admitted to reserve. The hospitalier explained that September had become the strongest month ("Yesterday, for one, I had already filled the hostel").
He assigned me an upstairs bunk in a small room for eight that reminded me of Frómista's. In the lower bunk there seemed to be no one.
"Can I take the one downstairs?" I asked.
- No, I've reserved it.
It turns out that it was for José Manuel, the Gaditano, who appeared shortly afterwards. I had seen him in the previous village, Ledigos, eating a piggyback while I was taking a cane at the bar before attacking the end of the stage. José Manuel was a snorer finished, but neither that, nor the small room, nor that he would have been about to run out of room in the hostel they rushed me that time. Maybe because I had a lot to take care of, among other things to eat, it was late. But after shaving, showering, giving me cream on my feet, washing clothes and laying it, I lay in the bunk for a moment and fell asleep.
When I woke up in the middle of the afternoon I had passed the hunger. I decided that I would wait for dinner with Toni and went out with the intention of seeing the town and looking for a cool and peaceful place to write. But in Terradillos there was nothing at all, I went around its deserted streets with adobe houses and I found no bar or shop, just a multipurpose building that was the social center for the four remaining cats in the village. From the facade of the church I hung a tombstone with the inscriptions almost erased from those fallen by God and by Spain (with the Joseantonian rubric: “Present!”). The parish gave shade in its back to a small park with tables, and there I sat and opened my notebook to take notes.
I soon felt a few steps; I looked up and saw that a tall, robust, white pilgrim was crossing the park, with two blonde braids interwoven with the one that had been coinciding in the shelters for days, although we had never spoken. We greeted each other, and when I returned to my notebook I heard him saying:
"I'm sorry to bother you, do you know if there's any shops open around here?"
Her English seemed good, though she was not native, and from her accent I couldn't figure out where that young woman would be.
"I'm afraid not, the only shop is inside the hostel, I think it's open at 5:30.
I told him where the Jacques de Molay was. She was staying in the other hostel in the village, one (inevitably) called The Templars.
"I'm almost gone, I don't like private fucking hostels," he told me without telling me.
I smiled. I told him the same thing happened to me.
"But I don't like them not because I could have stayed out, that would have bothered me, but I really do want to look for my life from time to time, because what I need is that they don't give me any facilities, you know?" he added while taking a seat at the other end of the table. "No places where I can book and where they offer to stay for a rest one more day if I need it, I would, believe me. Because, how do I know if I really need it? You don't know how much I value public shelters, the better they suck, especially because they force me to get up in the morning, by eight o'clock everybody out.
He took a pause to take a cigarette to his mouth that he drew from a cigarette case. Suddenly, it came to my mind when I had seen it for the last time: it had been the same morning, in the bedroom of the convent in Carrión de los Condes: if I was one of the last to abandon him, she had to be the last, because when I came out I was still in bed, despairing.
Fortunately, it was almost time for them to open the shop, so I proposed that we go there. He told me that his name was Irena and he was Russian. This did not wait for me. Indeed, his braids had sounded Slavic to me. I would have liked to ask him what a Russian was doing there, but on the way he kept telling me without stopping his stories, and when he began to rant of the permissive education he had received from his wealthy parents and I do not know what, then I disconnected.
Later I reflected on the lack of comfort that Irena had told me about. In my case it was not that I needed someone to get me out of bed, I already took care of my anxiety about it, not even sleeping in a luxury hotel I would have stopped fulfilling my obligation as a pilgrim. But in the daily routine of shelter there was something that helped: no matter how bad I slept, I was tired or my feet hurt. It would have been the same if I did bad time. In any of the cases I had to get up from the bunk, pick up everything and get out. Regardless of how I had gone the day before, I was prepared and thus had the opportunity to check how things were going in the reality of the new day. Well or wrong, then, decisions were made on the way, leaving little room for the conjectures, without space for the unfounded worries. I wondered if it was for this that day I had let myself go without anticipating that the Jacques de Molay could find me full, or that I was not disturbing in the presence of snorchers in the small room where I was going to sleep that night.
The small shop of the hostel was very little stocked, there was nothing more than drinks, cookies, bread, cheese, sausage and some other can. The question was that in the hostel the kitchen could not be used because it was reserved for the restaurant. I died of hunger and decided not to buy anything to zampame the menu that offered for ten euros. Toni, however, was not willing to go through the hoop and bought a can of beans with chorizo with intent to eat them there with me. At six opened the dining room and we were the first to sit at a table. There were no problems: the waitress, after taking note (caldoso rice, trout, flan) took the can of Toni to the kitchen and returned its contents in a succulent smoking dish. I intended to share it all, but he refused, except as far as the wine was concerned.
After dinner we went to the multipurpose building of the town to see if we could get some beer. There were older people playing cards, but also a group of young people from the region who were warming up engines before the imminent arrival of Saturday night. We sat outside with the bottles. It was still hot even though it was getting late. Next to us a puppy slept and, from time to time, raised his head opening his mouth to catch and eat the flies that were around him.
Toni began to talk to me about the unique characters he had known on his travels along the Camino de Santiago, those who had stayed to live in him.
"They are people who "live on the Way," he said. "They themselves say so to you, that at a certain point in their lives they threw themselves into the Way and stayed to live on it.
But Toni did not refer to the more or less idealistic entrepreneurs who had set up a shelter believing in the values of solidarity of the Camino and, at the same time, as a way of earning a living. The Jacques de Molay was a good example of this, his owner had been caring for him since the nineties. No, he was attracted by the losers with a free personality and therefore peculiar, those who had found little resources to find refuge on the Camino and were throwing away foreign values in society.
"In the stage of the day after tomorrow, in Reliegos, there is the Elvis bar, there you have to go, where the Sinin.
A guy with a beret, Sinin, apparently didn't care whether you consumed or not, you could take the outside meal if you wanted because the important thing was for the pilgrims to rest listening to the music of Elvis Presley, in a place that was an old house full of inscriptions and painted on the inside and on the outside.
"And another of the mythical is the Ave Phoenix hostel, in Villafranca del Bierzo, that is an authentic hostel of the Camino, you will see.
He also told me about Paco, the hospitalier of Castrojeriz, a type of the same species. Apparently, he allowed his beard to grow throughout the year and in winter he made his annual pilgrimage to Santiago, and then, in Finisterre, he cut it and burned it like in an esoteric ritual. When we were in Castrojeriz I was worried about the swollen foot and, unfortunately, I did not accompany Toni, who went with this Paco to throw a few beers at the bar.
"And he told me that without problems, that if I wanted to stay a little while in the hostel, that for him there was no problem, that I would have a bed in exchange for contributing to the tasks of the hostel and that we would distribute the donations.
"Toni, the hospitalier," I said.
It did not seem to me that it was serious, although it was clear that he was attracted to the idea of staying on the Camino, perhaps as an idealized dream. He must have felt good recreating it while we gave him the second bottle of beer on the terrace of the social center of Terradillos. In any case, Toni, who spent much of the year doing Caminos de Santiago, could in a way be said that he was already living in it.



Courtyard of the Jacques de Molay hostel, in Terradillos de los Templarios. There is an air of camaraderie that facilitates the talk. You take out a drink and you are already talking to someone. I came alone to do the Camino, but I had never spoken to so many people. My daily identity was left behind and now I am only a pilgrim, like everyone else.

15. Terradillos — Bercianos del Real Camino (23.2 km)
I had not yet dawned when I arrived in the first village after leaving Terradillos early. At the entrance itself, I headed towards a house surrounded by countryside that was the hostel-albergue Moratinos. Outside, on both sides of the door, there were backpacks leaning against the wall. I saw that one of them was Toni’s. I got rid of my backpack and left it aligned with his before entering the bar. (I felt like the outsider of the West movie that arrives at a town and, tying the reins of his horse in front of the saloon, identifies the other rides and knows who is to be found inside.)
Indeed, there he was, with an American coffee and a Neapolitan. There were some more pilgrims having breakfast.
"Do you remember the long one who took my bunk in Hornillos?" he asked me when I sat next to him with my latte, pointing my head at the other tables.
He was referring to a very tall man whom he gave his bunk to because he could not fit in the normal ones. Initially, the big one had been awarded to Toni because, being more comfortable, it was the one that they gave to the first one to arrive at the hostel (who was doing pole). That man was having breakfast there, he had already seen him when he entered.
- Yes, I remember.
"Well, the other day, at the church of Carrión de los Condes, when I went to mass of pilgrims with the Japanese, I went and met him at the altar of the parish priest. He was dressed as a priest! Though he did, his skirts were cut off.
You definitely don't know who you're next door to on the Camino de Santiago.
"How do you say 'cure' in English?" Toni asked.
—Prist. It is written Priest but pronounced Priest.
- Like Judas Prist?
- Same.
Toni got up leaving his mobile phone with the camera ready and went to the priest. “You priest?” he asked him. The man nodded his head and then asked him to take a picture together. He got up from his chair: mustache, hooks, grayish with large entrances, shorts and sportswear: an Austrian priest. He would never have said it. Standing up, Toni didn’t even reach his shoulder. They both raised their thumb for the photo.
That morning I walked along with Toni to the town of Sahagún, midway (and midway also from the French Way). My foot was practically healed, but I didn't want to get excited and make the mistake of always pressing the step to keep up. So I accompanied him during that first stretch, but I told him that afterwards I would continue alone.
In Sahagún I remembered that it was Sunday by the shops, that they were closed (in the former villages it was more difficult to warn it). We went to a cafeteria-pastries and, before entering, we left our backpacks out leaning against the glassware, in line with those of other pilgrims who were inside. In The Way, the character who plays Martin Sheen also leaves his out when he enters a bar in Burgos, and they steal it. When I saw this scene in the film I thought that they had forced the script, since it did not seem credible that someone left their stuff on the street unguarded. But there I was, doing exactly the same thing (clear that Sahagún was not Burgos). On the one hand, it was a practical matter: the pastry shop was small and there was not much room for the voluminous backpacks. And on the other, it was a custom of the Road: we all did it and doing it we felt one more. A kind of sign of confidence towards the rest, because in any case there there was nothing but pilgrims.
At Bercianos del Real Camino I arrived at 2:00 in the afternoon, in the worst of the heat. A village with old adobe houses, many of them abandoned or served as a shed. The church bell tower looked like a watchtower because it was seen as an iron beam structure. As I read on the internet later, the old church had collapsed and the new church had not yet finished wearing it for lack of money.
Sweaty, I went to the parish shelter, a restored farmhouse that had been a rectory and kept some mud and straw partitions. As soon as I entered the lodge, one of the volunteers received me offering me a glass of water that was kept fresh in a botijo.
"There goes the host, a guipuchi," he said after asking me where he was from. It was clear that he was from Bilbao.
There were three volunteers carrying the shelter, the three wearing yellow T-shirts with the logo of Hospitaleros Volunteers, who was a human figure with arms extended in an attitude of offering a hug. Marciana, a smiling Brazilian who sealed my credential and took the data to register me. And also a completely bald Italian who was going to prepare us for the community dinner of that night: pasta.
That Sunday afternoon I went out with Toni for a walk, but the sun was burning in the deserted streets of Bercianos and we took refuge in a bar. With the cane we were invited to bite some chorizo and bread that they had in the bar. We left the dish clean, good thing we were the only customers. We asked for another round to get more chorizo. It was good. Then Toni proposed a final round, but the time for dinner was approaching and we decided to go back.
As soon as they opened the dining room, the five Spaniards who were in the hostel (out of a total of about forty pilgrims) ran to get together. To my left Toni and to my right Amparo, the wife of Pascual, the Valencian, who sat in front of me and next to José Manuel, the Gaditan. At our table others were accommodated to those we did not even pay attention to throughout the dinner, since Toni, Pascual and José Manuel began to throw themselves pulls and it was easier to abandon themselves to the chatter and laughter of our little group, than to have to make the effort to be educated with foreigners and in English.
Before serving us dinner, the bald Italian, who was the one with the singing voice, recalled that there was a bank at the reception so that we would leave our donation there for accommodation and food.
"Remember, with what you bring today, those who come tomorrow will dine," he said, reciting what he put on a sticker attached to the wall.
Then we had to sing "The Rap of Blessing", whose lyrics also hung from the wall of the dining room. One, two, three... the Italian then ripped off to rap with his hand on a table to mark the rhythm while the others accompanied him in unison:
This is the rap/blessing.
Bless sir/feed.
Bless my friends - bless my brothers - bless everyone who shakes your hand.
Extend your arm / shrink it / and with this - you are blessed to.
There were applause and big holgorio that immediately went out because there was hunger. They left a fountain with salad in the center of the table and then served each of us a plate of macaroni with tomato and bits of sausage from Frankfurt. For dessert half banana.
"Well, they did leave little donation yesterday," said José Manuel. "Would they not be Catalans?"
"No, they would be Andalusians wanting to make fun, but without having it," Toni told him before putting his half banana in his mouth.
When we finished dinner, the Italian master of ceremonies took the floor again and asked for two volunteers to scrub the dishes. The Spaniards, in a synchronized way, looked down with deaf ears while offering themselves for the task a Frenchman and an American.
But before he invited us to go out to witness in a group the magnificent sunset that was going to occur on the moor and to celebrate a simple community act.When we got up from the table, Pascual said that he would go to the bar to see if they would throw the party of Liga (there was a Valencian derby: Villarreal-Valencia). José Manuel said that he accompanied him. The hospitalier Bilbaín also excused himself by saying something about the Athletic party.
The others went to a small park next to the shelter, dry and uncamped, from which the horizon was seen. We sat on benches and on the floor, and remained silent the time the sun took to hide. Then we stood and made us form a circle, and with the orange light of the twilight, Marciana, the Brazilian hospitalier, sang a prayer for the pilgrims in Portuguese.
Then, the Italian lit a candle and we passed it to each other, so that whoever wanted it would share a few words with others when it was up to him to have it in his hands. Those who spoke thanked the fact that they were there at those moments and some remembered loved ones. Fortunately, not everyone opened their mouths. When my turn came to me, I took the candle with both hands as if it protected a sacred fire and held it for a second looking at the flame (seeming to pray in silence but very aware that they were looking at me), before passing it to the next, relieved. During the round several languages were heard, but not Spanish.
In conclusion, the Italian proposed that we hug each other at the same time as we called ourselves “Good Way!”. Next door I had a girl who approached me smiling and with whom I almost hit a bump because I leaned to my left and she came to me on the same side, that is, on her right. I quickly corrected and leaned to the opposite side, and when I hugged us, I drew to myself with so much momentum that it troubled me a little bit.
I did not move from my place and so I did not embrace others who, like Toni or Amparo, did not move from theirs either. But some did the full round. As Marciana, who approached me to give me the hug and the same incident occurred with the previous girl, I did not understand why it did not fit the first one.
"But where do you have your heart?" she scolded me. "Coração com coração," she added, holding her hand to her left chest and then to mine, before putting our hearts together in a strong embrace.



In Bercianos, after the community dinner at the hostel, we have gone to see the sunset on the moor. We have been like this, in silence, the time that has lasted. That they propose these things is very well, if not, you do not. They contribute transcendence to the experience of the trip. Even if then you have to do something more, like share a few words or give hugs.
16. Bercians — Mule Mansilla (26.3 km)
In the hostel of Bercianos, in the drawer "Leave what you need, take what you need", I found a shell of zamburiña, a mollusk that is similar to the scallop but smaller and darker color. I had painted a small yellow arrow that was hardly appreciated because it had been blurred. Perhaps they had discarded it for that reason, I imagined that they would have replaced it with a shiny white veneration with the red cross of Santiago, which was what it was wearing. I took the zamburiña and hung it from my backpack with a rubber. Finally I had my distinctive.
I had breakfast, left my donation on the couch and, after hugging again Marciana (this time well), who was at the door of the shelter saying goodbye to everyone, I left with Toni following the arrows towards the night in the field. There was a full moon and there was no need to light the flashlight, it looked pretty good. Toni kept talking about this and that, and I remember that I thought it was a pity, because according to what he said to me I was losing a phenomenon that seemed unique. So special was that even Toni was left speechless when we finally stopped to observe it: in front of us, the lunar disk was getting orange as we approached the Earth on its descent. That was not enough to be a “moon set”. But what made it more spectacular was still the fact that on our back, the first rays of the Sun were pointed out. One came in, the other one came out. We took pictures, but nothing was worth compared to what we were witnessing.
During a stretch we walked in silence, as we did too. Until we arrived at El Burgo Ranero (which to me, I don’t know why, it got into my head that was El Burgo “Rainiero”, and so I said a couple of times and Toni added “from Monaco”, leaving us the two of laughter), where we looked for a cafeteria and, after drinking our respective Americans and with milk, each of us went on its own.
At this stage, the aspect of the road and its surroundings remained unchanged during very long stretches: by crossing a large stretch of fields, a straight path of land beaten by the footpaths, next to a regional road that almost no cars walked. At some point I went out to the road, by walking wide on a more regular floor. But I took a great scare when a van of the company Jacotrans (I suppose loaded with backpacks of pilgrims) passed at great speed a couple of meters from me, taking advantage that I had all the straight for her alone.
So, for sure, I went back to the dirt road. Its width was like that they could walk through it, at the same time, two people. It was a walker and yet it seemed to have rollers because in the middle it grew some vegetation. We all helped to strengthen those two parallel paths, since once formed, no one started to walk through the slight accumulation of gravel and herbs of the center. And looking at the ground I looked at the dust or white ring that covered it, which was the cause that I had forgotten the original color of my slippers (that is to say, they were blue). That white floor had some lunar surface because it was full of footprints, lots of drawings of shoes superimposed on tops of others. With my step I also printed my mark there, but very soon it would be erased under that left behind.
Another characteristic of these stretches was the line of trees that accompanied them. They were still young, but one day they would give good shade to the pilgrims. In the rest areas, which had tables and fountain, there were bigger and more leafy. I decided to stop at one where there were not many people. To the north they began to see the mountains of the Cantabrian mountain range. From there came a fine wind. Suddenly, I noticed that those who were in the park when I arrived had left me alone. I felt some cold and put on my jacket. I could not hear more than the slight breeze moving the branches of the poppies, which already let the first leaves fall. And I realized that although it seemed to be a lie, we were already in autumn, and from my way, I had already traveled more than half.
In Reliegos I went down a street to go to the Elvis bar, a must-see visit according to Toni. Perhaps I even met him, as he had told me that he was thinking of eating something there to chat with Sinin, the owner of the business, one of those singular inhabitants of the Camino. I also wanted to check that he was still in his place what he had left written on the wall inside the bar the last time he was there; apparently, the pilgrims’ inscriptions had become a tradition.
The facade of the Elvis was blue and completely painted. When I stood in front of it I had the feeling that the house looked at me, it was because of the eyes that had drawn it on the two covered windows on the first floor. It looked like it was a casual place and even a little crazy, the anarchy was evident, it was clear that there was freedom there for everyone to express themselves as they wanted. “WE SPAK ENGLISH”, was read in one of the scribbled texts, and I laughed at the lack of spelling, wondering if the English spoken of the Sinin that would be at the level of the one he showed in writing. On the terrace were placed the chairs and tables, although to the good of God, and there was no one.
It was closed, «Weekly rest» I put on a leaflet handwritten at the door. It was Monday. A pity, I wanted to take a look at the inscriptions that had been left by the people and see Sinin himself. Anyway, I noticed that there were also things written outside, to marker, and I pointed out the following declaration of love:
With more damage than years
First I smiled up your ass,
Then I lost my ass because of your smile.
This way he passed by on his way.
your Santiago
I love you.
It must be curious to do the Way by calling himself one James. «What's your name?». «Look, it's very easy, I call myself the saint: James.» Surely it would be the most original and picturesque thing to present one like this, especially before the foreign pilgrims. Because in English no one could hear anyone say «The Way of Saint James», but the whole world used the expression «The Way to Santiago», which in my crude form sounded like «De Camino tu Santiago». I don't know what I had laughed about before, after all, my English was also a «I SPAK ENGLISH».
In the municipal hostel of Mansilla de las Mulas, they sealed my credential and took the data from me in the log book. Then I chose a free bunk, extended my bag in it and, after shaving, showering and giving me cream on my feet, before washing clothes and laying it, I decided to treat myself a small blister that barely bothered me but that did not leave.
I had detected it for the first time in Frómista, the day when I had loosened my shoelaces to facilitate the circulation of blood on my foot. That made the swelling cease definitively, but in return my foot danced more inside my shoes and, precisely that day, due to a friction, the blissful blister appeared. Since then I had made myself dissipated, dissociating myself from it, trusting that it would get bored of me and disappear. But since this had not happened, the time had come to take the needle and the thread that I had brought in my bag and give it a stitch to the matter.
I sat down in my bunk bed taking advantage of the fact that the bedroom was quite clear at that time. The pricking of a blister had never done it before and did not want anyone to tell me how I had to do it. Also, it could be unpleasant to see. The big problem of the common rooms was obviously the lack of intimacy. I had commented with my wife one of those days when she asked me how it was going to be exposed to the eyes of so many people, men and women, all together, sometimes even a little hacinated. I remembered the vivid impression that made me the first crowded room, in Santo Domingo de la Calzada. But I had quickly gotten used to it, I had entered into the dynamic. I didn’t seem to have people looking at each other because the priority was to rest. And yes, there were dirt, odors, disorder and lack of decorum, but it was understood that we were pilgrims doing the Camino. So, for a practical matter, I immediately started to go to the shower directly in gayumbos, although that yes, my briefs were not counting of slip and were white, but black, so I could be fixed, so that I could not be too.
The ampoule. I had it on the outside of my foot. The weight of the backpack had crushed my feet like the tires of an overloaded car, so that the overflow of the plant rubbed me more. On Wikipedia I had read that due to friction, the cells of the upper layer of the skin were shed from the lower ones and, like a spring, from the inside the plasma burst filling with fluid that bubble called ampoule. Plasma helped regenerate the skin, while quilting the area to protect it from further damage. But as it was necessary to walk daily, there was a danger that it would explode on the fly causing a major breakdown; therefore, sometimes it was better to perform a controlled detonation.
I pinched it with the needle and came out the clear liquid, which I cleaned with a clinex. Then I threaded my needle and gave it a stitch, letting it hang some of the thread so that the rest of the fluid would drain out there.
- What are you doing?
It was Pascual, it startled me, I hadn't heard him enter the bedroom.
- But don't you see you can get germs in?
He said he had to use hypodermic needles, the ones they sell at the pharmacy, and no sewing thread. And put Betadine on me, to disinfect the wound. And then put a dressing on me, to protect it from more friction. And give me Vaseline on my foot before I walked, so that it slipped and no more blisters came out. And change my socks as soon as they got wet in my sweat, especially if it was too hot, because maceration was the worst. And...
"Okay, okay, okay," I interrupted him, overwhelmed by so much advice. I was putting my head on like a hype.
I didn't do any of that. I overreacted. I took off the thread the next day and forgot about it, because it healed me. And for a few days at least, I didn't have to worry about the blisters.



The Elvis bar, in Reliegos. A place between idle and crazy. The house looks at you. Sites like this, mounted by inhabitants of the Camino, attract, like stories about people who one day decided to change their lives.
17. Mule handle — León (18.5 km)
About 6:30 a.m. I went to the exit door of the Mansilla hostel and there I met Toni, waiting for someone with whom to (de)part. We set out and decided to travel in his company this stage because the next day we were going to separate. This was his plan: from Leon, Toni was going to climb to Oviedo along the Camino del Salvador, crossing the Cantabrian mountain range. Then I would continue along the Primitive Way to get to Santiago. Next, I was planning to take a bus to Ferrol to return to Santiago to travel the English Way. And then I would go down to Lisbon to walk up the Portuguese Way. All this before returning home, probably in December, for his sixty-two birthday.
"It sounds good," I said.
As we walked I noticed that he was looking at me, but in my face he found no irony.
Toni had to have bedbugs at his home in Barcelona to extend the journey so long without wanting to return. What seemed clear was that he felt better doing the Camino, and that he lived with his "partner", as he called it.
"Don't you miss her?" I asked.
"A little bit. But we're fine. I didn't go back to the trouble of falling in love and getting married or crazy. What a laziness. Do you know what I work with? With how well you are in a quiet relationship.
“But the comforts of being at home? I am already a little tired of sleeping in shelters and eating pre-cooked.
"Yes, it tires. Like the backpack, it is a drag. But what do you want me to say, it weighs me more when I am lying on the couch without doing anything," he said, fanning the passage and ending the confidence.
Just before Puente Villarente we entered the cafeteria of a hostel called Philosophy (it was really called that) to have coffee. When a while later we resumed the march we met Pascual and Amparo, who were at a good pace, light without their backpacks, as they continued sending them to Jacotrans. We went with them, but immediately Amparo had to retire to some bushes and, leaving the couple behind, Toni released Pascual a «until later Lucas».
"If it weren't for this one, who is always pissing, no one would come forward," he replied angryly.
The stage was short and simple, and my foot had healed at all, so I followed Toni’s rhythm without problems. I was comfortable with him, but as always as I accompanied him, I had the feeling of not knowing where we were going. I stopped to take a photo and then he also stopped to wait for me, but as I was uncomfortable holding him I no longer took pictures all the way to Leon.
Before eleven o'clock in the morning we were waiting for them to open the shelter of the Benedictine nuns of Santa Maria de Carbajal, along with some Koreans, the Valencians who had also just arrived and many other known faces of the road.
The convent hostel was in the middle of the Humedo neighborhood, so we had it easy to go tapas towards the sunset. But before we got into work we went for a walk. Near the Plaza Mayor we passed in front of a travel bookstore called Iguazu. I remembered that at the beginning of the summer I had been there with my wife, when we visited Leon on vacation. How well we had had without realizing it.
"Look, that's one of mine," she told me, pointing out a book in the window.
It was I would never get to Santiago, the title had graced him. We had seen pilgrims on the streets of León during that day and, a little earlier, we had joked about the possibility of doing the Camino together, but my wife did not see herself in shape for it.
We went in and took a look at the book. I bought it. And three months later there I was again, in front of the same bookstore, this time doing the Way and accompanied by a certain Toni. Somehow, that book (or rather the title with its provocative point) was the trigger.
"What if I do it and tell you?" I said that day with the book in my hand to my wife.
With the nostalgia of that memory, I continued to wander along with Toni through the Húmedo neighborhood until we finally entered a bar. The plan was to have tapas dinner, the ones that they took out, so that we had to ask for "cuts" of beer if we wanted to return in conditions to the hostel. And the truth is that we had a great time at that kind of farewell party that we celebrated in the bars drinking, eating and chatting. Despite the bar that I was sometimes given, I had been lucky to meet Toni, because besides being a good companion I had taught me the insinujos of the Camino.
"Let's see: the good pilgrim," he said, as if to take my lesson.
In the last few days we had reviewed the decalogue of the good pilgrim, as he and I understood it, but it seemed important to repeat it once again to make it clear. Between the two of us we completed the list.
1) The good pilgrim traveled alone. On the way he joined others, but the journey as a whole did so individually.
2) I traveled on foot. By bicycle it was another type of experience, the bikes took less but passed by many villages.
3) He carried his backpack. To use the services of Jacotrans turned him into a tourist pilgrim, a tourist, as they were told.
4) He slept in public shelters, he did not reserve, he made his own the maxim that says: «The tourist demands, the pilgrim thanks».
5) Completed the entire journey at one time, with a minimum duration of one month, instead of going on stages for several years.
For me there were three other additional points that added intensity to the experience of the Camino de Santiago, only that I did not share them with Toni because I understood that they depended on the personal circumstances of each one. These three points brought me a little closer to what the medieval pilgrims must have felt. The first was to have the possibility of walking directly from home. The second, to consider the pilgrimage as something that was done only once in life. And the third (and at this point I felt more fortunate still) was never to have been in Santiago de Compostela.
And yet the experience of the trip showed me how relative all the above was. The decalogue of the good pilgrim that we had made Toni and I was not entirely true, or at least it was not something that should be taken very seriously. Now that I write this I remember a overweight American girl who had been delayed because she had had had many difficulties during the first stretch of the Camino and that, seeing that she was not going to finish in time to take the flight back home, from Burgos to León she recovered her days renting a bike and sending daily the backpack with Jacotrans. I also remember a Canadian grandmother of eighty years who in San Juan de Ortega was waiting for a taxi accompanied by her grandson to take them to a hotel that they had booked in Burgos ("eight years and today I have walked twenty kilometers, what do you think?"), I also remember the Finnish who had brought her two newly graduated nieces to the institute, crying in silence in the courtyard of the Jacques de Molay hostel in Terradillos, because the next day she went home with broken feet, but promising that she would return to the next year to the village.
And, without going any further, there I had Toni, going around the Way more than a merry-go-round. I would have his reasons. And my wife, why couldn’t she try to do it using as many aids as possible? I myself was willing to break the first of the rules, to go alone, to accompany her if one day I asked for it.
But all this matured him with the journey. At that moment, as the “shorts” fell, our friendship was exalted in the shared certainties of what was right and what was wrong. At one point, Toni told me that he felt sorry to separate himself from me because, from now on, to know with whom he would throw the beers. Before the intoxication was noticed too much in our face, we asked a waiter to take a picture of us. It was the only one that took me with him: we passed our arm in the back and with our beer shorts in high, we looked together, as he says, to the future. We did not get very favored. Neither of us were very much of being in the photos.
We returned to the hostel shortly before nine o’clock. I had already finished the day and my intention was to retire to the bunk and, with the rest of my lucidity remaining, select the photos and write the texts for the blog. But at the entrance to the convent we found two very young nuns moving fast, the skirts of their habits forming flights, informing the pilgrims that they were about to begin the act of blessing in the next church. We told them that yes, we were going now, and as we went up to the rooms with the intention of snooping us followed us from behind, and that in that shelter we men slept apart from the women. But the nuns did not cut themselves and went in sack, walking around the corridors of bunks, touching the shoulder of everyone who made the mess in bed to explain it in a perfect English if necessary.
I was a little annoyed, although with the dizziness of the shorts I let myself be carried away. «These things of normal are not done», Toni justified himself, for neither was he to go to Mass unless he accompanied some young pilgrim. But as they had caught us, he pushed him as to me that sort of consideration towards those who were sheltering us that night. So we went to the anteroom of the church and there, before entering, the same young nuns explained to us the guidelines to follow during the act. Of the hundred long guests in the hostel, they managed to gather about fifteen. We met the very high Austrian prist and Marta, the Argentine, who no longer addressed Toni since they got lost in the darkness leaving Hornillos.
In the church we shared prayers and chants together with the convent nuns congregation, most of them very old and some even without being able to stand straight in their choir seats. The two very young men took the singing voice and combined in the celebration the Spanish, English, French and German, playing the organ in addition, and I did not cease to marvel at their energy and ability, and so I had moved them in their lives to dress habits. Those girls, like the pilgrims, had also embarked on a spiritual path, but theirs did not admit half inks, it was certainly much more extreme. I envisioned them as 21st century punks, acting on stage with those outfits and behaviors that were unusual for girls of their age today. They had renounced their material possessions and in the nudity that they were guessed under their habits were given to an unconventional life, radically different from what prevails in today’s society. As we sang in chorus with them, the sound of music sounded to me even transgressor.

Mountains

18. León — San Martín del Camino (24.6 km)
One thing was good about the convent of the Benedictines of León: the exit door of the hostel did not open until six o'clock, when they also played a bull's-eye: the hospitalier in charge of our dormitory turned on the lights and began to walk through the bunk beds with Gregorian music ringing on his mobile phone. So, at least that morning, I did not reveal myself early in the succession of early mornings and we all got up at the same time, as in a barracks.
"Where can we leave the backpacks to come and get them?" Pascual asked the bull's-eye, who was a retired man who was in the mood for the Turigrinos.
"We don't want to know anything about it here, the transport companies are here to make money, and all they do is fuck up, and we're not here to make money, so we don't want to know anything about them," the man replied as if he recited a litany without stopping through the corridors up and down.
Toni said goodbye to all the acquaintances, including Pascual, to whom he gave a hug. At the hostel we took a frugal breakfast of donation and set off.
In the streets of León, the yellow arrows made you turn around so that you could pass in front of the cathedral. That morning I didn’t think it was wrong for us to lengthen the way out of the city a little bit. It was Wednesday, and in the square before the illuminated cathedral they were riding the fruit and vegetable stalls of a market. Toni talked to me about something, he showed himself even more loquacious than usual, so I couldn’t stop to consider that image a bit medieval of the gothic next to a popular market. We kept moving forward, we passed ahead of the Basilica of San Isidoro and he kept breaking down Dale that hit you and I tried to reconcile what was still scarce. At the end of an avenue we arrived at a park and, suddenly, on the sidewalk, we found that the yellow arrows drew a bifurcation: to the left we had separated the traffic from Santiago, to the square Odeño.
"Well, that's it," he said.
"Yes," I said, cut.
Then Toni took the initiative and approached me to give me a hug. I waved without thinking to my left and he did the same on his side, so there was no bump.
"Neither heart with heart nor host," he said as we parted.
We start walking immediately, each on his side.
"Have a good time," I said, raising his arm.
"You'll get to Santiago without problems, you're going well, keep up, without fear," he shouted as he walked away.
I ran my way, but immediately, without stopping, I looked back at him. I was walking as usual, with my cane grasped as if I were carrying a spear, swinging it to the beat of his hasty step. I was still there, within my sight, and felt the vertigo to see him go away, probably I would not see him anymore. But I feared that he too would turn around and find me looking at him, so I straightened up and went ahead. “Good way, partner,” I said between teeth.
I went as a ghost through the avenues to the outskirts of León. Groups of pilgrims were ahead of me who told me nothing. After a while, I went into a café where there was no one and I drank only my coffee with milk. Then I went through a suburban area of semi-detached villas that were half-built, abandoned there by the crisis, between camped out fenced and with doors and windows covered. At one point I looked up and found the warm colors of dawn, and then I felt some comfort.
From León to Astorga, the guide proposed an alternative route that was a little longer but distanced you from the national road that connects both cities. I discarded the proposal and followed the original route, the direct one next to the road, I did not care about the discomfort of the traffic or the ugliness of the route, preferring to finish the stage as soon as possible.
At the entrance to San Martín del Camino, I passed in front of two private hostels where I saw pilgrims settling in. Therefore, even if it was only 12:30, when I arrived at the municipal hostel I was surprised that that was so lonely. Sitting on the steps of access to reception I smoked a cigarette a man with a cap, tanned skin of weather and a careless ribbed beard. He answered for the neck of his shirt to my “good morning”. He entered behind me and, as I headed to the other side of the table, I understood that he was the hospitalier. In silence he sealed the credential and took the data from me in the log book.
"There's community dinner," he said with a harsh and angry voice, showing a slightly toothless mouth. "Sardines to the coal. If you want to sign up, you tell me.
He accompanied me to the bedroom, but before, in the hallway, the shoes had to be left in the shoemaker, which was completely empty.
"Haven't anyone else come?" I asked.
- No.
Oh, God, where had I been? At that time I regretted my decision not to look at opinions about hostels on the internet. Also if I had not stayed in one of the private hostels I had spent a moment before. Where were my people? Perhaps, the one I saw had strayed along the alternative road to Astorga. While I was barefooted, I noticed that at the bottom of the hall there were backpacks with their unmistakable transport labels hanging. I calmed down because that meant that someone else would come, welcome were the turigrinos.
In the bedroom, the beds were numbered. I extended my bag on which I wore number one and smiled as I remembered Toni's exit in Hornillos: I too had managed to make a pole position.
As I shaved, showered, gave me cream on my feet, washed my clothes and tended it, more pilgrims came in, known faces in many cases, so everything was fine again. At one of the tables in the courtyard, I ate an tortilla sandwich that I had bought along the way, along with a cold can of beer that the hospitalier had for sale. Then I felt tremendously tired. I went back to the room, lay down in my bunk and fell asleep.
"Didn't you really expect it to affect you?" asked my wife when we spoke on the phone that afternoon.
"No, not really," I replied. "And, before his silence, I added: "So we are.
It was she who encouraged me to sign up for the community dinner that night, I, in principle, didn’t want to. I was writing in my notebook on one of the patio tables, an enclosure with lawns and trees belonging to what previously seemed to have been a nursery school. Around me people rested calmly, having some drink, reading or chatting without stridence, was fine there. I realized that the only Spanish was me.
"You set the table," the hospitalier unexpectedly ordered. "He had come to tell me, and by the time I looked up at my notebook, he was moving away, the man seemed a little stressed.
Maybe he caught me as a band because it wasn't handled in English and I was the only one with whom he could communicate directly. I followed him to the corner where he was preparing the barbecue fire, so he could tell me a little more about what to do, where things were and so on.
Then some came to me to help. An Italian offered to prepare the salad, and the truth is that it was good to make it, it looked like a restaurant because of the layout and the cutting of the ingredients, I asked him if he was dedicated to the kitchen, but he did not want to confess. We put together the two wooden tables with bench and placed plates, glasses and cutlery (there were not two identical pieces). I uncorked the bottles of red wine that, although cheap, was in abundance. And by the time we sat at the table the sixteen that we had signed to dinner, José, which is what the hospitalier was called, said to give to the salad, that immediately the first consignment of sardines would be ready.
Next to me sat a blonde New Yorker with glasses of pasta, who was very happy that I was Spanish, because, he said, he had a lot of questions to ask me. Jose came from the embers for a moment to eat the salad, accompanied by a pitcher of beer but mediated with wine, which he again filled to the tops before getting up again.
"How do you eat this?" asked the American woman when the first sardines were served, which looked black as coal on the white plate. It was also true that it was dark and there was not much light.
He saw me lay hands on knife and fork, but Joseph, who was increasingly smiling and relaxed, asked us all to attend for a moment, as he was going to give us a demonstration:
"In-spein, sardines are eaten like this," and using his hands he tore off the head of the one he had on the plate and then grabbed it by the tail and raised it above his head and shoved it whole into his mouth as if he swallowed a Catalan calçot.
We all applauded, but the American woman next door didn't see it clearly, among other things because she saw that I didn't follow the hospitalier's method.
"But do they eat the bones? And the skin?" I wondered without daring with the ones waiting for him on his plate.
However, the sardines were good. And for dessert we served lots of watermelon and yogurts ("Yogurt for dessert? We took it at breakfast", followed the American woman without leaving her astonishment).
At the brief table that followed I had the opportunity to ask José where he was. His eyes were shining. He said he was from Madrid.
- And how are you hanging around here, boss?
"Well, nothing, that I came to do the Way and here I stayed.
- How about a hospitalier, are you comfortable?
"Uh, here I am very well," he said. "Look, before I came here I was very ill, about to clap it. But it's fine here, isn't it?"
I said yes with my head. It had been late for the standards of the Way, so we had to pick up. There was no need for a voice to organize, no need to look for volunteers, we all did something. I think we realized that, in his own way, that dinner had been memorable. When we finished picking up everything, I went back to the yard to see how I was doing the night before I retired to bed. Sitting on the steps was Joseph, smoking, just as I had seen him at noon when I arrived at the hostel. I breathed deep. He was fine there, yes.



In the municipal hostel of San Martín del Camino, José, the hospitalier, caught me by band and said to me: «You, set the table». To order, boss. And that is how it is, with the help of the other pilgrims who have signed up for dinner. They are very modest dinners, but in them the wine never lacks, even if it is a cheap red of Valdepeñas.
19. San Martín del Camino — Astorga (23.7 km)
In the morning, in the dining room of the hostel of San Martín del Camino breakfast was ready. On the table there was bread, butter, jam, milk and freshly brewed coffee, and the cups rolled over the dishes invited to sit. My idea was to have breakfast along the way, but I decided to stay when I saw the care with which Joseph had prepared everything. I had a freshly raised face, but I did not stop still filling up what was ending. As I had breakfast I thought about him, about his limitations and the difficulties that were guessed to him, and, observing the interest he put, I was glad that I had found there, in that lost hostel, the opportunity to feel useful.
When I left I thanked him. He made a vague gesture of assent and snuck away without looking at me. I went to where the bank was to leave the donation for dinner and breakfast, which was supposedly from what José lived (in addition to the sale of drinks), since the five euros of the accommodation were kept by the town hall. There were no signs of the type “What you bring today, they will eat those who come tomorrow”, or “Donative is not free”. Neither he had reminded us at any time. I left him much more than what he had left in any of the shelters he had visited until then.
On the road parallel to the road, I went still at night the first stretch of the stage. From Hospital de Orbigo, there was an alternative road to Astorga, a little longer but more beautiful. Today, I encouraged myself to take it. The guide said that here the plains of the plateau were left behind to cross a slightly mountainous terrain.
In Villares de Orbigo I passed by a house where they had left a chair in the middle of the street, to use its backrest as a support for the following note written on a paper: «W.C. (Services). Water. Not Donatives», with the «No» underlined. At the bottom of the corridor was actually seen the bathroom of a private house with its toilet and sink. And no one around, there seemed to be no trap.
In this same town, a little further on, against the wall of another house they had left a box of plums and a little sign on top that said: «For the pilgrim. Take. A greeting.» What nice, I thought I took one.
In Santibanez de Valdeiglesias I was absent as I passed in front of the bar of a hostel, whose terrace was full of pilgrims. I walked behind one that was probably American despite its Asian features. A lady in a dressing gown and slippers came from home, with a bread under her arm.
"But where are you going?" cried the lady who was in front of me, pointing to the street above, where the yellow arrows clearly sent a twist, and that we had both jumped, him by the wayside, and me by following him.
We turned around at the same time, like a spring, causing the laughter of those who were on the terrace looking at us.
The road became a track of earth and stones as it ascended towards a low mountain area, with small oaks and oaks. It pressed the heat. Getting to the little bar that had mounted a hippy in the middle of nowhere was like doing it to an oasis. There were hammocks hung between the trees, trays of fruit arranged on sections of trunks that made of tables and seats, and a kiosk with drinks whose motto was: “The key to the essence is the presence”, set between hearts and a sun. A pilgrim played the guitar singing “Wish you were here”, by Pink Floyd, while another accompanied her to the harmonica.
Near there was a stop from which Astorga was seen, of which the two towers of his cathedral stood out. As always in these cases, there were still several kilometers that inevitably became very long. When I was approaching the city by paths surrounded by corn crops, Mahmud, the British lord, dark and in full physical form that had been my neighbor of bunk in Burgos. It was already for me a family presence because I had subsequently coincided with him in some other hostel and several times on the way. Still, I was impressed again by his sluggishness when he overran me near Astorga. Neither a stick nor a hat to protect myself from the sun, nor even seemed to carry water. It was as if I had gone out on a Sunday by the English countryside. I was carrying a standard-sized backpack whose weight seemed to be foreign. If I saw something of the environment that called for his attention, he stopped, turned away to observe it better, asked who could clarify his doubts and then re-entered the route again with his light walk of school with backpack.
That day, as soon as Mahmud moved me forward, I stung (he was only short of whistling) and set out to follow him. He seemed happier than an eight passing over the whole world. I managed to put up with his tug, though hard enough. We were leaving behind at an insulting speed to pilgrims who seemed to suffer in penance, who advanced to short steps with the help of two sticks. At the end I assumed that I was doing the fool and slowed down letting him go. When this man arrived at the shelter, he would barefoot, take out from his backpack the thick novel that he was reading and lie down to read it in the bunk, while around him the rest of the people carried out daily routines of showering, washing, creams, cures, meals and so on. But Mahmud didn’t even seem to sweat. When he finished reading and taking a light nap, then he would shower and prepare for dinner.
In Astorga I installed myself in the public hostel of the Servants of Mary, which was large in size because of its capacity for more than one hundred and fifty pilgrims. The cells of the former convent were now small rooms where only four bunk beds were available. When I returned from the shower, I found in the bottom one a Brazilian woman who was dusty. I had advanced her shortly before arriving to the shelter when she pursued Mahmud at full speed. She told me that she was from Brasilia, and little more, because she spent the day tucked in her sack with her mobile phone. The other two squares were occupied by two Frenchmen, a man and a young woman named Geraldine, with whom I would meet again at the hostel of the next stage.
I went to the center of Astorga, which was very close, with the intention of eating on the menu. I was very hungry and that blinded me: I fell in the temptation to taste the cooked maragato. And that I knew that it was a waste of purpose: ten types of meat more chickpeas, vegetables, soup and creams. And in this order, because the particularity of the cooked maragato was that it was eating the other way around: first the meat and finally the soup, so that it would enter everything (and to spare something, than on the soup). But I fell because the restaurant Casa Maragata was the first thing I found and was specialized in serving only this typical cooked.
I did what I could, and that the waiter encouraged me. Although I ate too much I could not finish everything. When I left the restaurant, I went for a walk around Astorga, to see from the outside the cathedral and the episcopal palace of Gaudí. Later, as if I had not walked enough that morning, I continued walking through the streets of the city to see if it would facilitate digestion and make it go down. Something (the chorizo among other things) repeated me, and did not stop burping. A little later, when I thought I had done in the stomach something of place, I got into a bar to take a chamomile.
On my way out I met Pascual and Amparo on the street, who were taking a walk.
"Don't see the cooked piece that we ate," Pascual told me. "We've gone to a place that we've been told is where they best prepare it.
"Yes, I have also eaten cooked maragato."
—First the meats: bacon, ear, nose, leg, chorizo, everything, like this, up to ten; then the chickpeas, the berth, the potatoes, and at the end a soup of fat noodles, and then homemade custards with a cake here, look don’t see...
- Yeah, yeah, me too...
- ...how we've gotten, busting hears, and also cheap, because then in the evening with drinking water you already have the dinner solved.
"How much did it cost you?" I asked.
I was gonna get it here.
"Right now I don't remember exactly, that this one paid for, how much did it come out of us, Amparo? And how much has yours been?
What a man, so he had heard me telling him that I did too. I should have answered him that I also did not remember “exactly.” But I lack boldness for these things and, foolish of me, because Amparo did not open his mouth, so as not to be rude I said that mine had been twenty-three euros.
"Ah, yes, now you have reminded me, ours was twenty-two.
- Coffee included?
"We don't drink coffee, and then we don't keep an eye on it.
Okay then, you win, I thought. Then we commented on the next day's stage and said goodbye wishing each other a good digestion.
Back at the hostel I bought a bottle of water from the liters and a half. I started to feel squeaky on one of my toes because of a small brush. Here’s one more cause for concern. Although this one was well deserved, for picting at me with horned gentlemen.
In the room, the woman who was from Brasilia was still stuck in her sack, typing in her mobile phone. The space was too small and I decided to leave there with my notebook and to prepare the photos and texts of the blog. I could have gone to the common areas of the hostel, but instead I went back to the street, to an adjacent park. There, in a bank, I would not bother anyone. But between the heaviness of stomach, tiredness and loneliness, I felt decayed. Mine was curious: I ran away from people, especially in the big hostels like that of Astorga; but then, and more than ever after an experience as pleasant as that of the community dinner of the previous night in San Martín del Camino, I missed her and felt alone.
It was dark by the time I finished doing my homework. I went back to the room and found it with the light off. It was still nine o’clock, but the Frenchman wanted to sleep. The Brazilian looked like a spectrum with her face illuminated by her mobile phone. I climbed the ladders of the bunk, lay down and went to sleep.



One of those hippy-new-age chiringuitos that appear in the middle of nowhere. In them reigns the good vibe: hammocks, trunks to sit, fruit, juices, coffee and cookies, all of donation. When I got to this one there was a girl playing the guitar and another the harmonica.



Arriving at Astorga Mahmud, who walks very fast and fast. In the photo you can see his stride with respect to the passage of the pilgrim on the left. I have stung and followed him for a stretch, until I have not been able to endure his march.
20. Astorga — Foncebadon (25.8 km)
I got up at six o’clock, went to the bathroom, prepared and left the Astorga hostel. I went into a nearby bar offering breakfast. Miraculously, the cooked one the day before had already digested it and its place had occupied a great void. At the bar they had the TV on with the news of Canal 24 Hours. While eating my toast I looked at the screen with strangeness, for I had not heard of the resignation of one minister or why they demanded the cessation of another. I was totally disconnected from today, as if I were traveling in a foreign country.
When I set out I did not feel the discomfort of the brushing that had left me the day before because of the absurd race behind Mahmud. So I found myself walking at ease and in good spirits. Although from time to time something that Pascual had told me the previous day was coming to my mind: apparently, the parish shelter of Foncebadón had only eighteen places and it would be necessary to "speak" to stay away. I knew that, in bad, private shelters would not be lacking, but still I was in the same ones as always and the fear of being excluded was hovering over my head.
At this stage, the Castilian plateau was definitely left behind. Through the Maragatería region, I climbed to the mountains of León with a gentle but constant slope. I walked without stopping to El Gasso, a town where I ran into a bar called Cowboy. Toni had not spoken of this place, but it had the appearance of being one of those curious tascas of the Camino, like Elvis. It was striking because the Cowboy also had the facade all painted announcing the bar. The place occupied a small nave that in its day must have been a garage to keep the tractor and the tools of tillage. Inside, that seemed like a almouda because of the number of old objects that had hung behind the bar, a batiburrillo to which I finally managed to draw a sense: it seemed to be a collection of things related to the wild West, among which stood out cowboy hats, although there were also of other kinds, and all this in a typical scenario of bar chasstised with Spanish flags of background.
- Can I have a latte, please?
"And without favor," replied a gentleman on the other side of the bar in his sixties, wearing grey mustache and golden metal-mounted glasses.
"How's it going, a lot of people?"I asked him, looking for him to tell me something.
- Don't fucking call me from you!
He served me a coffee with black milk, no foam, very strong.
"No, not many people walk. And in the afternoons no one," he finally said, softening it a little. Maybe I didn't have a good day. I picked up a certain resemblance to the former football coach Luis Aragonés.
Ramiro, who was named after him, opened the Cowboy bar in 1991, and told me that he didn't understand all this about people walking in the early morning and in the afternoon God didn't come by.
"Look, I don't know if it's because of the heat or the Chinese, but this didn't happen before.
I stayed still for a while, observing Ramiro’s somewhat unspeakable ways with some Americans who had just entered and who were shouting to make themselves understood in Spanish. The coffee I had served was hard and I had a hard time turning it around. But I would not have dared to leave without finishing it.
After El Ganso, the landscape became more wild. There were sections in which the path crossed forests of young oak trees separated from the road by a metallic fence, in whose mesh they had inserted hundreds of crosses made with two branches or crossed sticks. I thought that someone would have thought of forming the first one and the pilgrims who had come from behind would have imitated the work. Although thinking better, it could also have emerged as a spontaneous tribute to the American pilgrim who was killed near here by a distraught local. It happened three years earlier: the woman, forty years old, left the road and then followed arrows that the murderer had diverted for someone to pass through her estate. It was up to her. I remembered what I had told myself as soon as I started the journey, about always trusting in the signposting of the Way. That woman had also taken confident part of Astorga that morning, but she never finished the stage.
At Rabanal del Camino I had eaten fried eggs with bacon and potatoes and a cane. I had been wanting to do this for several days now. Moreover, since I had separated from Toni, I had proposed to follow a new food policy: nothing to carry it in my backpack. Not even water, in order to go lighter. What was thirsty? I would already drink when I arrived to a place where I could do it. I was on the French Way and every little bit there was a village. I told my wife in a message that included the picture of the dish with the eggs, to make her jealous. She replied that not to bring water seemed good to her, although "risked".
—Why risked?
"Well, because I don't see you asking for water in a bar, and beer doesn't moisturize your muscles.
"What do you mean, no?" I've asked for water many times.
- Yes, for me.
That's why, when I got up from the table ready to attack the ascent to Foncebadon, I was tempted to buy a bottle of water in a store. But at that time I was not thirsty and, totally, not to drink it I preferred not to carry it with me.
I arrived safely at Foncebadón, a mountain village located at one thousand four hundred meters of altitude, which was abandoned until the revival of the Camino in the nineties brought him back to life. I went through its only street (the Camino itself), which was still not paved despite the cars that accessed the hostels, bars and restaurants that were on both sides. I felt like being in a winter season with a wild spot, as if the place was not finished being domesticated at all.
Upstairs, at the end of the street, was the church that had been rehabilitated as a shelter by an American Jacobean organization. Before the closed door, sitting on a bench, they waited for Pascual and Amparo, bored, along with Isidro, a Murciano whom he was about to meet. No one else. So much alarm for this. As we waited for them to open, we were joined by a Belgian woman and her daughter, and later two Canadian girls.
At two o’clock the door opened and a man and a woman appeared, blond both, about sixty years old. In a basic English, paused and hypervocalized, the man spoke for the two smiling all the time. They came from California and were volunteer hospitaliers of the American Pilgrins On The Camino association.
"Who understood what I just said?" asked Patrick, who was the name of the man.
The foreigners raised their hand and I also did it, timidly. I felt like a child in a classroom. I had to act as an interpreter for the Spaniards. Before letting us in, Patrick gave us absolutely all the instructions for using the hostel, one by one, many of them unnecessary because trivial. Between that and my translations, he had us there at least a quarter of an hour, and he did not miss the knowledge «Remember, with the donation that you leave today, those who come tomorrow will dine». We were impatient. Isidro, the Murcian, ended up bursting:
"So much English, so much English, the mother that she... that we're in Spain, aren't we?
I warned with surprise that he was going to me, raising his voice a lot, as if I were the one who had irritated him. He added that he was tired and all he wanted was to shower, eat something and lie down in the bunk.
"What, what does he say?" asked Patrick.
"No, no, nothing, he wants to know something that I'll explain to him now, as soon as you're done," I answered.
I cursed the mutian, a rustic man, also in the sense, for putting me in trouble in front of the teacher and the others. To top it off he was shouting, although in his case he was doing it because he was half deaf, something I did not know at the time. His opposite was a Californian with fine ways of pastor of congregation, standing there with his smile, we waited patiently for it to end. The truth is that I was also exasperated.
As they asked for collaboration for the community dinner, after shaving, showering, giving me cream on my feet, washing my clothes and laying it, I offered to cut vegetables and get rid of them after other tasks. At the dining table I agreed with the two Canadian girls. I took care of the potatoes and them with the carrots and onions. They were two cheerful girls who laughed at how slow they were going. They were not what they said in shape, and in their families, apparently, no one believed they would be able to complete the Way to the end. The first stage for the Pyrenees, from Sant-Jean to Roncesvalles, had almost killed them, and then, among the many rests and they were going through turtles, they accumulated much delay.
"In Logroño we took a bus that left us directly in Astorga, but don't tell anyone about this.
The hostel, meanwhile, was filling up. When I finished with the potatoes I went out and went down the irregular and stony street. I spent the afternoon in one of the bars, reading, writing and drinking a few beers. By the time I returned to the hostel, I felt confident enough to continue to act as an interpreter during the community dinner and the subsequent "time of reflection", which was like Patrick had called to the meeting that was to be held later in the chapel of the church.
The dinner consisted of a salad and a bean stew with vegetables and pieces of chorizo. For dessert melon. I felt the protagonist for my functions as a translator, and so I encouraged myself to start conversations with those who were sitting around me at the table, with the Belgian woman and her daughter among others. At the end of dinner, Pascual and Isidro said loudly (but Patrick could not understand because this I did not translate) that they had remained hungry. They went to the room and opened their backpacks to complete the dinner with what they had brought, and went from going to the community meeting.
The bedroom occupied the nave of what was the church, but by means of a partition they had retained a separate for use as a chapel. Patrick went up to the altar building and the others sat on the two benches that were straight ahead. He said that he was not even Catholic, but Methodist, but that that it did not matter in the spiritual path of which we participated all there assembled. He was noticed in his salsa speaking in public, he had tables. He explained the tradition associated with the Cross of Ferro, by which we would pass the next morning at first hour. And then he told a personal anecdote as a parable so that we could reflect on it.
He said that this was the second year that his wife, Sandy, and he volunteered in Foncebadon, but that the first time had been in a hostel in Grañón, also run by the same American association. According to him, that was an experience similar to that of walking the Way, because of the uncertainty about how they would develop as hospitaliers, who would present themselves at the door, those things. Toward the end of his stay there, there appeared a boy who was walking from his house in Germany. Chatting with him at dinner, the boy told them that his father had given him these three advices before leaving: first, he would attend to his own thing and not worry about those who left behind, who would be fine; second, he would not be faster than his soul could go; and third, he would take care of his body.
After two days, Patrick and his wife finished their turn in Grañón and they themselves decided to follow the Way to Santiago. It was a coincidence that they met the boy again, this time in the square of the Obradoiro. And, also, accompanied by his father, who had flown to Santiago to meet his son at the end of his pilgrimage. Patrick proposed that they dine together that night, he wanted to meet that wise man so that he would give him more clues about life. When they met again and asked him about it, the man replied that he had nothing more to say, that what he had told his son was all there was.
We remained silent. Patrick was already lighting the inevitable candle that we were going to have to pass to each other so that, when the turn came, everyone would share a few words, whatever came through our heads. People were saying very nice things, one of the Canadian women recited a poem that she had composed herself. When the turn came to me, I made the same pantomime as in Bercianos: I took the candle with both hands and kept it a second as curing the moment, so that I did not have to open my mouth in return. The last one who had to hold the flame was a guy who had not repaired until then.
"I never thought I was going to find myself in a situation like this," he ran over, releasing the witness immediately, as if burning him, causing everyone's laughter with his spontaneity and relieving the burden of solemnity in the act.



Bar Cowboy, pure western. It is appreciated in the photo the detail of the backpack parked outside, as if it were a ride with which you can not enter the saloon. It is a custom of the Way, of those things that you see doing and imitate. In the Cowboy I ordered coffee with milk, but Ramiro served me a hard American, without contemplations.



During a good stretch, hundreds of crosses formed between the wires of the fence, in memory, perhaps, of the American pilgrim murdered near here three years earlier by a local who had diverted the arrows to get lost. One of the bases of the Way is to listen to the yellow arrows, to be guided by them. And look.



In Foncebadón the street without asphalting gives a feeling of wild village, without domestication. Cruz de Ferro is near and from there its resurgence, since the village was abandoned. Here there are only pilgrims and services for them, so in places like this one very well appreciate the microcosm that is formed around this floating country called Camino de Santiago.



Sandy, the Californian volunteer hospital in Foncebadón, takes the data from me in the registration book after stamping my credential. Everything is very basic in these public hostels. The registration book itself seems taken from another time. To her right the bank to leave the donation with which they will buy the dinner of the pilgrims who come tomorrow.
21. Foncebadon — Ponferrada (26.8 km)
I spent a bad night in Foncebadón. In the small common dormitory of the hostel too many bunk beds had fit, and to the feeling of drowning by the agglomeration it joined that the structures of the beds were made of wood and they brought out a lot of noise to anything that you moved. And between the scandal of creaks, someone started to snore. I deduced that it would be Isidro, it seemed to me that they came from where I had seen him settle down. I was afraid to snort as soon as I was left rock. To top it off, the beans of the dinner had gassed me and I was uncomfortable. Although, judging by the creaking of bunk beds, I was not the only one who did not sleep, it seemed that we sailed aboard a galleon.
But somehow we saved the night because in the end, I don’t know how, I fell asleep. In the morning I would have left directly, but it was necessary to have breakfast because the stage was mountain. In the dining room I sat in front Geraldine, the French girl with whom I had coincided in the hostel of Astorga.
"How did you sleep?" he asked with a smile.
"Not very well," I replied. "The bunks are too loud."
She had a theory about what happened and seemed willing to share it with me, to see what I thought: she said that the noise that we each made when we moved in bed generated a fear to disturb us and such a tension, that it did not allow us to leave freely to take position, relax and fall into sleep; so that in the end, the anxiety about not being able to rest caused us to stir more, causing even more creaks.
"Come on, it would have been better if we had been carefree to make noise so that we could fall asleep, reducing noise and favoring everyone's sleep.
I couldn’t be more right. A shared bedroom functioned like a machine composed of complex pieces that influenced each other, resulting in the good or malfunctioning of the set. Now, how did it go about relaxing when you wanted it? I asked Geraldine. She told me that she had learned a lot about it on this trip, having left on foot directly from her home in Poitiers.
"And how is the Way through France? Is it marked? Are there shelters?
"No, he's not very prepared, and since I don't have much money, what he did was sleep outdoors, in parks, in the countryside.
"Did you make a bivouac?"I asked, admiring that a young girl like her would dare.
- Yes, whenever I could.
- And you weren't afraid?
He said yes, very much. But it was worth it because you also learned a lot, among other things to relax. I didn’t know if to believe it. Although that night at the hostel, Geraldine just gave time to realize the tension that was breathing in the environment before falling peacefully asleep.
I was on my way to the top, just two kilometres away, and as I approached it, I was very disappointed. It seemed rather like a small scavenger on the edge of a road through which cars were passing. It did not correspond to what I had pictured from the images I had seen. Indeed, it was a matter of framing, because I took a counter-scathed photo in which I only showed the top of the mountain, and within the image I captured some pilgrims who with their backpacks and sticks, seemed to be mountain climbers making a summit on the steep peak of a mountain. How true it is that one has to go to the places to see how they really are.
I walked away a few meters to a hermitage that is there and sat on a step to observe. People waited their turn to be portrayed next to the post with the cross. The truth is that I did not see anyone carry out the typical ritual of throwing a stone to the pile brought from home, symbolizing the purpose of getting rid of a heavy burden in life. Perhaps it was not my turn to see any staging and it was done discreetly. Anyway, it was a place that called emotions, I saw a woman cry on the shoulder of another. I looked at a girl who opened the backpack and wasted her things outside, looking for something that she apparently did not find. At the end, she started to write in her notebook, tore the leaf and left it bent under some stones of the mound. She stood a few moments, very quiet, and then left.
I went on because I was waiting for a hard stage. On some mountain trails I immediately arrived at the refuge of Manjarín, another of those famous places of the Way. In an abandoned village of shepherds, Thomas, commander of the Order of Temple, opened in the nineties a hostel for pilgrims. It is not only that they had no light, it is that they did not have running water, Toni had told me. Even he had never dared to spend the night here.
Between a variegated accumulation of distance signs and worn-out multicolored banners, one accessed a cabin that seemed to be about to collapse. Just as I entered, I crossed over with Thomas, who was going out with a dog for a walk. I was wearing a kind of white robe with the templar red cross on my chest, but on my head I was wearing a cap and not a medieval mesh size as I had seen it on the internet. Being like an institution, I felt very lucky to have seen it in person.
Inside there sounded Gregorian music. Disorder and dirt were even greater than what could be intuited from outside. There was not a single free hole in the walls, it was all full of badges, photos and posters. There was also jewellery with templar symbolology, on sale by a man who regularly played a small bell to summon the monks of a convent, but in this case it was to attract pilgrims. They had coffee in thermos, in exchange for donation, but I did not see glasses clean enough. A pilgrim who was taking it asked the man of the costume if they had toilets, and he replied that, what is said «washers», no, but that if he wanted to do his needs he had on the other side of the road a booth where he put «Latrines». I waited a little, curiosing over there, and when the pilgrimage came back, it was me. And it was indeed that it was like other times: a box made with boards between the scrubs, and inside a lid with a hole in the middle and its lid.
From Manjarín it was followed by mountain roads. At one point it appeared, very down and still very far, the deep part of the region of Bierzo and the city of Ponferrada. With this visual reference I realized that we were at high altitude, it seemed to me that I could touch the sky with my hand. Here began a strong uninterrupted descent of about twelve kilometers that forced you to go without turning away the view of the ground to not mess with the stones. It was very hard, with the backpack on slopes it was inevitable to overload knees and legs.
In the middle of the descent, in El Acebo, I had lunch a portion of empanada with a cane. This small town was the reverse of Foncebadón, its magnificent views over the Bierzo and the mountains had made it a tourist place with pedestrian streets, souvenir shops and balconadas with flowers.
I kept going down to Molinaseca, where the slope ended, but there were still eight kilometers to Ponferrada. It was very hot. I wish I had gotten into a restaurant where it was fresh, to replenish strength with a menu, calmly, drinking lots of water. Instead I kept wanting to finish and make sure a place in the hostel, the usual. And besides, I met a girl who had spent the night in the shelter of Foncebadón. At those moments I came out of a pharmacy giving cream in my arms, who had them burned by the sun of the mountain. I had light blond hair and very white skin, it seemed Scandinavian.
"Hello," I greeted her.
"Hello," he replied.
He left me out of place, I didn't think he was Spanish.
"Yes, I am Madrid, although my parents are Dutch.
Her name was Andrea and she was going fast, but I kept up with her. She told me that she had just finished the race, she was a computer engineer, and that she had come to do the Camino de Santiago to reflect on the future options before her.
"And nothing, as I had twelve days available, what did I do?" I looked at the stages and saw that it gave me time to do it from Astorga.
As soon as he decided, he went to the Decathlon closest to his home for the basics, and in the afternoon he took a bus that left her in Astorga and the next day he was on the Way.
"But I've forgotten even the sunscreen, and look, I've burned mogollón, like a guiri," he laughed.
Actually, it was me who was burning, because in the end I couldn't keep up with her and she left me behind, she was going too fast for me, fresh as a lettuce (but for her it was just her second stage!).
I took the rematch with a Japanese man I surpassed in the final stretch. It was a strange thing that man, seemed quite old, almost an old man, and had a long knob of oriental sage. And yet, in the descent of the mountain, with his backpack and the two sticks, I had run away. When I saw it I could not believe it, I made crosses how it was that the chrysm did not break, it had to go extremely concentrated. Of forces, in any case, I would not walk leftover, because his running style was shattered and because now, at the gates of Ponferrada, I was the one who left him behind. I saw him in a corner of the road, with his hands resting on his knees and his head ahead, as if he were to vomit. I was made a cisco. At least I told myself when I came to his side.
The hostel in Ponferrada was one of the greats and, according to my experience of the last days, that meant that I wasn’t going to socialize much. Better, because I didn’t feel in the mood to be with people. Or worse, because it was those same people who could lift my spirits. In any case I was exhausted and, after shaving, showering, giving me cream on my feet, washing my clothes and tending it, I took a nap. And then it seemed to me that, since I was there, I had to visit Ponferrada, his Castle of the Templars and the historic helmet. But it was rather unfortunate because I walked crawling away from how tired I was still. I cared more about everything.
At first I thought of some poodles, two men with beards sitting on a pedestrian street, behind a dog sleeping and a dish for coins. But they did not play the flute nor were beggars. On a sheet as a sign, they indicated that they lived on the Camino and offered the seal of the credential, it was understood that in exchange for donation. And indeed, they had pilgrim's decks and backpacks of which the scallop hung.
I passed by, but at least I had the reflex of turning around and secretly taking a picture of them. Then I very much regretted not having addressed them. What label would they have had? Why didn’t I come to give them a coin? I could have asked them what they were doing, what it meant in their case “living on the Way”. I would have posted it on the blog. My passivity or despair might have been due to the lack of the necessary mental energy. I had lost it along with physics on the long walk of that day.
That night in the hostel, I said goodbye to Pascual and Amparo. They came doing the Camino for stages, twelve days ago they had taken it back in Burgos and now they interrupted it here, in Ponferrada, they were already tired.
- It's actually about Amparo.
"Yes, this time it is enough that we are no longer of age," she said, who almost never spoke and when she did it it was to cover her husband.
The hard stage of that day had also made a dent in them. They would come back perhaps in spring, it would be to end up in Santiago leaving from here.
Pascual explained to me in detail the combination of the different means of transport that they would take to return to his house in Valencia, a whole work of organizational art. I attended him a little, but I had to interrupt him because the head did not give me for more, I told them that I was going to bed, to see if I rested and the next day I was able to get up.
"Well, we said goodbye now," Pascual said.
And he threw himself at me and gave me a big hug, and then Amparo. Then I withdrew to my bunk quickly, before my pregnancy was noticed. He caught me with my guard down. I would never have thought that I would miss them.



Cross of Ferro. I have not seen anyone fulfilling the ritual of throwing a stone, brought from home, symbolizing that you get rid of a heavy burden in your life. The priority was to take the photo, for which you had to wait your turn. But I have seen people cry and the place gets moved.



Cross of Ferro. Seen this way, it looks like the tip of the massif of Aizkorri. And yet, it is the same little mountaineer punctured in a stick in the other photo. Question of framing. I was hoping to find this, perhaps because it is what others had shown me. Although disappointed, how good it is to go yourself and check the general plane.



Refuge of Manjarín. There is no running water. The hospitalier is Tomás, also known for being commander of the Order of Temple. Gregorian music sounds and occasionally they ring a convent bell to attract the walker, as they sell Templar jewellery.



I descend towards Ponferrada, which is the urban core that is seen at the bottom, down there. This descent has killed me. It is many kilometers downhill and the legs have to endure a lot of pressure. But it is a very powerful sensation that gives the sky so close.



They're not poodles, even if at first glance they look like them. They're people who live on the Road. They offer a stamp in exchange for a donation. I can only speculate about them because I haven't come near to give them a coin and ask them. And now I'm sorry I didn't do it.

22. Ponferrada — Villafranca del Bierzo (24.2 km)
At dawn, following the arrows to get out of the city, I went through a passageway in the underside of a block of houses on whose wall there was a graffiti in which «Compostilla» was read, with the two «or» replaced by scallop shells. It was funny, what a silly humor, I thought, looking for the relationship that could be between a postilla and Compostela. Later I found myself again with the same word, this time in a traffic sign. I took out my mobile phone to search it on Google and then understood that «Compostilla» was the name of the neighborhood that I had crossed.
It continued along a neighboring road, leaving behind the last houses of Ponferrada and with them the public lighting. As I was clarifying I did not need to light the flashlight that had been tied to the head, it was already visible. Soon I came to a fork in which there was a sign of the Way like those that had guided me so far. I stopped looking for some other indication and then I heard a noise of branches very close, between the weed that bordered the narrow road. It would be some bird. But suddenly, it jumped to the road something, an indefinite animal the size of a very thick and dark dog. It stood looking at me about five meters away, its eyes were shining. At that moment the time was suspended, I was paralyzed with my senses catching to the maximum and my head looking for an exit. I did not feel that any pilgrim came from behind, but I had the cane to defend me. In an unconscious impulse, I lit the front lantern and saw it: a boar! I drove to run up (at great speed, the hoofs resoning in the asphalt) until I hidry.
Scared, but also delighted by the beauty of this encounter with the wild and unpredictable, I waited just a minute for several pilgrims to reach me before continuing the march behind them. I immediately arrived at a town called Columbrianos and got into the first bar, one called Bar Pedrín. As I entered, the waitress, behind the bar, groped her eyes and protected them by putting her hand, telling me to turn off the flashlight please. I had not even noticed that I still had it on. “Ostras”, I told myself moments later, while I was drinking my coffee with milk, without being able (or willing) to remove from my head what had just happened to me out there.
From Ponferrada to Villafranca, the stage passed through the Bierzo region, a large hole surrounded by mountains. At first the valley was green and quite flat, and then there appeared hills covered with vineyards. The landscape was Mediterranean, according to the microclimate that they enjoy in Bierzo, although the roofs of the houses remained slated and that recalled the proximity of the mountains.
I began to feel pain when I stepped on. I stopped in a corner and took off slippers and socks. Indeed, there they were: the blisters; they had come out like rashes on both feet, on the edges and also on the plants, under my fingers, which were the ones that were making me see the stars. The strong one went down to Ponferrada, plus the final race with the heat and the feet macerated in sweat, all of it had finally passed me bill. I remembered the bombing of advice regarding the blisters that I received from Pascual in Mansilla de las Mulas, during the next few days I would regret not having listened to it. But it is that when I gave them to me, I could not take seriously what this man told me, not after his tremendism in Castrojeriz before my inflamed foot, which in the end turned out to be nothing.
I sweated the fat drop to get to Villafranca del Bierzo, and once there, I thought to go as always to the municipal hostel, which presented the first at the entrance of the village. But Toni had recommended the mythical Ave Phoenix, a hostel of long tradition on the Way. I was indecisive. I looked for a shadow and took out my mobile ignoring my resolve not to look at the comments of the users on the internet. I checked that the Phoenix Ave had either very good, or very bad reviews, depending on whether the atmosphere or comfort was valued more, respectively.
I finally decided to live the experience. In addition, this way I would greet from Toni a certain Juan who worked there. I sealed the credential and took the data a chizuentón with prominent belly and cano mustache, which in the head wore to pirate mode a handkerchief stamped with the Confederate flag. That man had something of Obelix and, as it seemed singular, I asked him if by chance it was Juan. No, it was not; Juan was walking around, he would immediately appear. And no, neither was Mr. Jato, the famous owner of the hostel.
The bedroom that touched me was grubby and stood on top of the dining room. There were a lot of bunks stuck against each other. This was something that bothered me, having to sleep bed against bed with a stranger, but luckily I found one that was isolated. I stretched out my bag in it and, as I pulled things out of the backpack, suddenly I found myself behind my back with a little girl about two years old, in diapers, who was looking at me. Faced with my disconcerting, she turned around and, wobbly, turned back to a adjoining room from where her mother was watching us, sitting on a mattress on the floor.
The hostel was a kind of reconstructed house that surrounded a central courtyard like an atrium. In it there was some careless vegetation and some that went with dog and tent had camped there, in a corner. There were tables and propaganda chairs on the terrace. It was necessary to go out to this courtyard to access services that looked like barracks: one of the compartments had hole in the floor instead of toilet and there were no doors, instead the cabins were protected by simple shower curtains.
It hurt just by putting my foot on the floor, so after shaving, showering, giving me cream, washing my clothes and laying it, I decided that I would not drag myself around Villafranca del Bierzo to make a painful tourism. In a bar around the corner I ate an tortilla and cane sandwich, and then I went back to the hostel to prick my blisters and rest lying on the bed.
In the middle of the afternoon, I went out with my notebook into the courtyard and then the confederate handkerchief that looked like Obelix came up to me to tell me: “Look, there you have Juan.” He was a guy who was sitting on the terrace with a can of beer and smoking a cigarette of roll tobacco. Maybe he was my age, even though he was shellier, with his hair and beard disturbed and his skin tanned out of weather. Despite the heat he was doing, he was wearing a thick green sweater from the army. I approached him and gave him memories from Toni. “Ah, yes,” he told me, although later he would admit that it was impossible to remember all the people who were passing by. As soon as I told him where I was, he invited me to sit down with him and took two new cans of beer from the machine.
"I know Donosti very well," he said. "I lived there for many years.
He told me that he had been homeless since he was old enough to leave his native Badajoz. Between one thing and another, he went to San Sebastián and settled with his dog at the 23rd door of the Anoeta football stadium. Until the social services put him in a course as a hospitality assistant, from which he went out with a job as a kitchen assistant at a well-known restaurant in Parte Vieja Donostiarra.
"Shit, don't see how they put me on the job, male, little bastards.
From here on, John began to explain to me the humiliations to which he was subjected in that work. When he told me, he became upset for moments, even gave me the impression that he was getting angry with me. «These bastards put me well», repeated again and again giving nervous cramps to his little one and drinking from his beer can while referring to the injuries suffered, related to the contempt of his rights but above all the contempt for his person.
"Because I worked harder and better than anyone else, but they found out that I was coming from the street and then they fucked me well, and that I was subsidized and it didn't cost them anything, motherfuckers.
He took two years and ten months. He swore to me that he tried, but he had to leave. He couldn’t even get him kicked out to get the unemployment.
"And then I came to the Way."
He started walking around like the homeless man he was, staying here and there for a few days, a season.
"The only good thing about it was that I took out my manipulator's license, and so Jato, the boss here, rescued me for the kitchen of the Phoenix Ave. Do you want to see if it's true what I told you, that I know how to work well?
I told him I didn’t doubt it, but in any case I was going to confirm it because I had signed up for the community dinner, for which Juan was going to prepare us a Valencian paella. He got up and withdrew to the kitchen to get to it, because, he said, it took time to do it well.
A couple of hours later, in the dining room of tables and benches of the Phoenix Ave, we squeezed about forty people for dinner. Before we started with the salad, Jesus Jato, the boss, made us get up and hold each other by the hand forming a chain. He simply said that he was happy to have us there that night and that we would get to Santiago well. Then he raised his intertwined hands and shouted:
- Ultreia!
To which we all responded by imitating it:
- OLTREIA!!
And then:
- Siseia!
"WHAT!"
(It seems that the greeting among pilgrims in the Middle Ages used to be this: «Ultreia» [«go ahead!»], one said. «Et suseeia» [«and beyond!»], the other answered.
At the table I was surrounded by Danish and German pilgrims delighted to stay in such an authentic hostel, the first to have been appointed as such on the Camino de Santiago, according to their guides. I had also been reading in the afternoon on the Internet about the figure of Jesus Jato, a man who as a child had seen his grandmother house pilgrims on the block of his house and who, now, at almost eighty years old, still believed in all this, even though, in his opinion, so many shelters offering comforts were killing the spirit of the Camino. Reading this it occurred to me that, perhaps, the toilets with shower closets was not idle (or not only), but had some intention according to the spirit of campaign that predominated in the hostel. In an interview in a newspaper, Jato came to say the following:
The Way is like life. You start it and you go having joys, pains, hardships, good times, bad times, everything. And you meet people. But there is something there that makes those encounters special, including the one you set up with yourself. That is why it is a totally separate world.
Juan and Obélix confederate made their way into the dining room carrying between the two the great paellera. We all stood and applauded and took pictures as they leaned to show it to us. Spectacular. And she was really good, an authentic Valencian paella at her point. When we finished dinner I went to Juan to congratulate him. Until shortly before, all he knew about him was what he had told me, his words full of pain and rage towards those who had hurt him. But now I was going to congratulate (to show my respect) someone who dared to cook (and how) for forty diners from all over the world. «Fantastic la paella, Juan», I told him. He thanked me. He had wet eyes, he felt happy.
In the evening, the pilgrims retired to bed early, but in the dining room, which was just below the room, the hospitaliers and others continued to chat livelyly with their beers, among which the mother of the creature that had seen before should be, as the little girl was heard at times. While I was waiting to fall asleep, I was turning around all that, the Phoenix Bird understood as a place to take refuge. “I never thought that certain things should be priced,” said Jato, referring to the spirit of the Way, in the interview I had read in the afternoon.
From one of the bunk beds, a pilgrim beat down the wooden floor of the room to ask for silence from the downstairs. I thought I heard Juan laughing and coughing at the same time, while another of his group hissed asking them to lower their voice. It was the first time that I was in a situation where it was the guests of an accommodation who called those responsible to order. I smiled inside my sack. Indeed, that was priceless.



Spectacular paella at the community dinner of the Phoenix Ave. If there is an authentic hostel on the Way, that is the Phoenix Ave. You have to go there. The opinions that guests leave of this hostel on the internet are usually very bad. Those of pilgrims, very good.

23. Villafranca del Bierzo — La Faba (23.1 km)
It was cold in the morning, a temperature of just one digit when I went through the streets of Villafranca del Bierzo still at night. It was Monday, but so early that no one was walking that was not a pilgrim. After the village continued on the corner of a road without traffic, next to the river in a closed valley, and I noticed how the humidity increased the feeling of cold. I remembered the raincoat that I had left in Hornillos to go lighter, telling me that I would see what to do when I needed to warm up.
Well, here's what I did that morning before I left: I put on all the clothes I wore with me. Double coat, both in sweatpants and in a t-shirt. The dress of walking over the walk. With that more the jacket, and the backpack protecting my back, was not bad at all. Besides, in a couple of bars I recomposed myself by warming my hands numb with the cup of coffee with milk.
The temperature went up in the morning and the cold stopped being a concern to give way to the pain of the blisters and doubts about whether it would be able to finish the official stage in O Cebreiro, already in Galicia. The last stretch was «the greatest ascent of the French Way in Spanish territory», according to the guide, and before that, I did not rule out shortening the route by staying in La Faba, a village halfway up in which there was a hostel led by Germans.
To Vega de Valcarce, I was reached by a pilgrim who wanted to speak. His name was Kepa and he was from Bilbao. He had a powerful voice and direct treatment. When I told him that I was Basque too, he took a great joy (I did not know how much I was going to disappoint him). I had just started the Way the day before, in Ponferrada.
"My psychiatrist told me to do it," he added, looking at me.
I got the impression that I was hoping that I would ask something about it, but I didn’t. So I kept trying to get rid of her personal shipwreck, her divorce, the allowance she didn’t give her to live with, her children she barely saw. I listened to her but she didn’t even gamble with it. And it wasn’t that I slipped, on the contrary, but that was too sudden, so things weren’t told. She kept talking to me about the classmates of the therapy group she was coming to, who were cheering her up for WhatsApp. They were jokingly asking her if she was already praying.
"They're kidding me because I'm the most anti-religious thing you can do to your face," he said. "But I'm not doing the Camino de Santiago because of that, I've come for mental health reasons.
- Yeah, yeah, me too.
There was the thing. I stood under a magnificent highway viaduct that stood high above our heads. I told him that I was going to wait for a trailer to pass so that the photo I wanted to take to that bridge would look better, but Kepa stopped too, to wait with me.
"Do you know if there will be a pharmacy in this town? I've run out of Orfidal and I need to buy.
He stared at me again, as if waiting for something of mine to happen to him. “It was clear that he would not stop until he achieved my complicity.”
When we got there, I left him buying his anxiolytic and told him that I was moving on, that if we'd see him later.
I was definitely going to have to shorten the stage, because it didn’t go well. When I arrived in Las Herrerías, the village where the ascent to the mountain started, I stopped to have a beer. I knew it wasn’t doing well, as it was a great relief to sit down at the time, but then, as I got up, the blisters hurt twice as much. What was going to be done to it. While I was taking the cane, through the windows of the bar I saw Kepa come along with another pilgrim. They were chatting as if they already knew each other, determined towards the end of the stage in O Cebreiro, and I thought it would be good to stay in La Faba, with the Germans.
Interestingly, as soon as the climb began I noticed that, as my worst blisters were under my fingers, because of a matter of burden distribution, uphill I was not as torturous as downhill. That’s why I arrived quite whole at La Faba. And when I entered the shelter enclosure, on the porch I instantly recognized the figure of Mahmud, whom I hadn’t seen since the time I tried to keep up in Astorga. It was unmistakable with his yellow cotton t-shirt and shorts of summering.
"Man, you here?" I greeted him.
I was bored because I was taking a good time waiting for them to open the hostel.
"I have preferred to stay here because my guide says that this place is one of the most beautiful on the Way. And it is indeed.
I sat next to him at the bank waiting for me too. As an architect he was (for his appearance I would have said doctor), he explained to me something about the beautiful church before us. Mahmud was of Turkish Cypriot origin, British colony in his time, although he had been sent to London as a child to study. But his origin only explained, at most, his great endurance to the heat. That’s why I went straight to the point.
"Excuse me, Mahmud, but I would like to ask you a question, if you are so kind: how come you walk so fast and agile?"
I added in joke that I seemed to see in him someone hiking in the English countryside, instead of doing the Camino de Santiago. He laughed.
"I actually walk on weekends in the fields of Oxfordshire, where I live.
The hospital girl approached us at that time with a tray in which she brought glasses and a jar of lemonade with ice cubes. The lemonade was made of real lemon, the slices were floating.
"Look, I'm going to tell you something," Mahmud continued.
And then he explained to me that when he was forty-five years old he gave him the chance to run his first long race, a half marathon in London, and that he then continued to practice, becoming a regular marathon runner.
"But wasn't it a little late to start?"I asked him thinking about me, who was about to turn exactly forty-five.
"Maybe I did, but understand me, I did it out of curiosity, I knew I had qualities and I wanted to see how far I got, I never tried to compete.
But there was more. In April of that same year, he told me, at seventy-two years of age, he had participated in the Ultramarine Atlas (Ultra Trail Atlas), in Morocco, a race equivalent to six marathons played in six consecutive days, walking and running alternately through stony mountains and deserts, carrying your food and drink in the backpack. And I had finished it.
- Seventy-two years old?
It came to mind of the old Japanese with Oriental sage knob who ran down the mountain to Ponferrada.
"Seventy-two then, yes. Now I have seventy-three," he said. "And after a pause in which he hastened his glass of lemonade, he added: "You will understand then, my friend, that making the Way is for me like walking."
The hostel in the small village of La Faba was run by a German association of friends of the Camino de Santiago, because the facilities had been restored with the money of a wealthy benefactor of that country, so he put it on a plaque. The hospitaliers who were covering the shift at that time were a couple of retirees from Frankfurt who came to spend three weeks (it was their third consecutive year there). The man was named Frank, and while I was chatting with Mahmud he was passing the broom through the porch, while his wife, Daniela, was walking from here to there taking care that everything was in order and serving lemonade to the pilgrims who were coming.
The place was magnificent; it was composed of a large house that was the hostel itself, a small church within which classical music sounded at a very low volume, and a landscaped area between them. The whole was surrounded by a low wall and shaded trees. In the middle there was a bronze sculpture of a medieval pilgrim, and next to it was a fountain of which a stream of water was flowing and where the feet could be soaked.
When they gave the two o’clock, Frank put himself on a table on the porch with the registration book and the stamp, and began to give entry to the pilgrims by rigorous order of arrival. When I arrived the turn took care of me in Spanish, managed it enough, said I was learning. I was meticulous with the information and the rules to follow in the hostel. Then Daniela accompanied me inside to assign me the bunk and show me the place. I was all perfect, very clean (there was soap of hands and towels in the bathrooms!).
There was no community dinner, there was a small shop in the village where we could buy food. Neither Frank nor Daniela were of those who enjoyed group socialization, they were too reserved for joint reflections made in circle and lit candles passed to each other, although on an individual level they were very interested in their guests. I thanked him, because that was a good place to rest in calm before entering the supposedly massified final stretch of the Camino in Galicia.
The environment and calm propitiated the conversation with the other pilgrims. In the afternoon I sat outside on one of the benches. There were two women with Asian traits who claimed to be Filipinos.
"Well, I am from the village where Miguel López de Legazpi was born," I told them without adding any other information, convinced that this would arouse a special interest in them.
"Yes, we know who it was, we studied it at school," said one of them, named Gilda, in a tone that seemed indifferent to me.
I had the vague notion that, without having been a piece of bread, López de Legazpi (conqueror of the Philippines and founder of Manila) was, at least historically, a figure worthy of consideration. Although it was also true that Zumarraga never saw any Filipino tourist visiting his home. And, in fact, according to them, the Spanish had not changed in the Philippines. The other girl, named Imelda, said that, being a little older than Gilda, she had been a little bit of a student in Spanish at school, but she had forgotten everything.
"Although there are words in dialect that left us from Spanish, such as "table" or "chair," Gilda said in reference to the table and chair before her.
"Hey," Imelda asked me, changing the subject, "and being you Spanish, how do you feel doing the Way and being at the same time in your country?
"Well, I suppose it's more comfortable for me than for you, even though the truth is, over the last few weeks I've disconnected from everything and I feel more identified with pilgrims like you than with Spaniards who aren't part of it.
"Because you are a true pilgrim," said Frank, who was coming to sit with us. "There pass groups of noisy Spaniards who pretend to be pilgrims but are only tourists who take advantage of our voluntary work.
I was absolutely right, although I could not help but smile when I saw in him a responsible German complaining about the Spanish flamboyance, a cliché that repeated itself. It occurred to me that the same thing would happen with the natives of any other country, if the Way passed through him. We continued to chat with the sound of the water falling into the fountain. It was true, I had not said it just for congrating with those who accompanied me: truly, I felt as if I were part of that, of a floating country called the Camino de Santiago.



The hostel of the Germans in La Faba is a wonderful place. Although it sounds topical by the hosts, it is true: it is all in order. And quiet. To the right the church, and next to it the German retired couple receiving pilgrims. To the left the porch of the hostel, on whose benches and chairs you sit to chat.
Galicia

24. La Faba — Triacastela (25.5 km)
Despite the cold of the morning, the hosts of the shelter of La Faba, Frank and Daniela, went out on the porch to bid farewell to the pilgrims. Narrowing their hands, they wished us all “good Way” and thanked them for their hospitality. Then Daniela, with the satisfaction and tranquility of the duty performed, even a small relaxation was allowed with her guests.
"I have a question for you," he said.
Well, what will it be?
And as a mother, she asked me if I had with me the documentation, the credential, the cell phone, the cane, the backpack... yes to everything.
"Then you can go now," she hit me on the shoulder and laughed herself as she hadn't seen her do until then.
I still could not know, but it turned out that La Faba was the last of the shelters with hospital volunteers in which I stayed, in Galicia nothing was going to be the same in this sense anymore.
The day began to start, once again the clear sky was going to allow me to see sunrise. It was convenient to have some natural light from the beginning of the climb, because the road was rocky. On the sides were cows grazing and I was eager to enter Galicia, to see written "Galicia" on some sign. As the blisters still did not hurt, I enjoyed the ascent and in an hour and a half I was already at the top of the mountain, in O Cebreiro, a Celtic village of stone and slate that I thought was too reconstructed and ready for tourists.
O Cebreiro was an emblematic place of the Camino, but the truth is that I did not pay too much attention to his church or to the treasures it contained. I was more interested in regaining strength with a ration of tortilla and coffee with milk. As I had breakfast, a crew of masons came into the bar who went to lean in the bar, all wearing caps and lying in identical blue monkeys. They would be working in some nearby work and came to throw the coffee. They spoke in Galician, a Galician very closed. Definitely, I was in Galicia.
A rural Galicia, that of the lost villages of Lugo. Because despite the fact that O Cebreiro was touristic, the rest of the villages I spent that day did not seem to me, although in none of them the establishments for the pilgrim were missing. But the few villagers they saw were dedicated to cattle farming: the villages smelled of stables and their streets were marked by dung salpicons of the cows that had passed on the way to the pasture (it was almost impossible not to step on anything). The men went with their inevitable blue monkey and the women in robes, both with katiuskas. There was only lack of rain, the moss that invaded the walls of stone must be missing.
I don’t know if it was the heat, the kilometers accumulated, the slope down towards Triacastela or all of it together, but the fact is that the damn blisters started to hurt me again. What amazed me was the contrast between how much they made me suffer and the immediacy with which they stopped doing it: it was enough to sit on the terrace of a bar and barefoot to notice an instant relief. But then, to continue it was a torture, my feet were put rabid.
I came across a very old man who was walking hard on very short steps with the help of a cane. I identified with him and about to wish him a “good Camino!”, but at the last moment I realized that he was an old man and my greeting might sound like a jerk.
However there was something new that helped with the moods: the official pillars that in Galicia signposted the Way. They appeared frequently and carried a plaque with the distance to Santiago (in meters!), so that whenever I left behind one, I was glad that there was already less.
Between how slow I was going and the repeated stops to refuel, I was left practically alone and I finished the stage very late, about four o’clock in the afternoon. I came so sore that I didn’t even worry about whether there would be room or not in the hostel, I simply addressed the public of the Xunta de Galicia, which was the first thing one was with when arriving in Triacastela. It turns out that there were free places, too much.
The hostel was made up of two large windows, located next to an esplanade of grass. It was from the time of the Xacobeo 93, the first Jubilee year that Manuel Fraga promoted to bombo and dish to promote tourism in Galicia. In this and other shelters built by those times, the investment made and the willingness to equip with a modern infrastructure to the Camino de Santiago was noticed. The hostel of Triacastela opened that same year, 1993, and at the first glance it could seem nice, although it had remained a little out of date. And moreover, it was not cozy because of its design more aesthetic than functional and because of the lack of maintenance.
Later I learned that many people preferred private shelters because for a few euros more they provided you with other comforts (for example, having kitchen utensils, because the hostels on the Xunta had kitchen but nothing else, neither pots nor cutlery). So for questions like these there were no problems of place, and, when I arrived, the manager assigned me a bunk in a small cabin with a swinging door. I shaved, showered, gave myself cream on my feet, washed my clothes and tended it, and between one thing and another I met my roommates, a couple of young Italians and Paula, a German girl.
I went to the pharmacy in Triacastela, which was called La Botica del Peregrino. As in Frómista, I was convinced that they would give me good advice there, because they must necessarily be specialists in foot ailments. When teaching the ampoules, the pharmacist did not find what she had serious. I recommended some dressings of the Compeed brand, some strips that, he told me, would protect the area, would favor the reabsorption of the fluid and would appease the pain. I did not have to remove them, he warned me, they would fall by themselves after a few days after fulfilling their function.
Ready. I felt happy, the problem was on the way to be solved. I decided to go back to the hostel to rest for a while. I walked like walking on eggs, very attentive to every step I took because I hurt a lot even with the sandals for a walk, it had to be a bit of pity. On the way I noticed a very old billboard, with the rusty structure and the faded background. But even though it was faded, what had caught my attention in it had been the unmistakable figure of Pelegrin, the popular mascot that made the logo of the Xacobeo 93. Pelegrin!, how to forget it, a character that in its day became as familiar as Cobi or Curro.
When I arrived at the esplanade in front of the hostel, I observed that half a dozen young women had sat in a circle on the grass around Dante, the Argentine who was Marta’s son and it turns out that he was playing the guitar. There were among others the Italian couple in my room, the Belgian from Foncebadón who was with her mother, and Andrea, the Madrilena Guiri. The girls were delighted with the music and the seductive style of the Argentine. The scene had something on campus campus or youth hostel. I looked at them a little apart and realized the distance that separated me from them: those boys and girls were the same age as Pelegrin, they must have been born twenty-five years ago. Anteayer. And I thought without envy that the young people wanting to roll was also a world that was happening inside the Camino and that I was already far away.
I had dinner in a very good-looking place called Complexo Xacobeo (it was also a hostel and hostel for pilgrims, hence the “complex”). At the hostel in Triacastela I had checked that I would have no way to recharge my mobile phone at night (there were plugs in the room, but they didn’t work), so when I entered the restaurant I asked the waiter if I could put myself on a table with a plug nearby.
"Anyone," he told me without stopping how busy he was.
At the free tables over there, I didn't see any shots.
But he immediately appeared again and gave me an external battery to charge my mobile phone. He was wearing a sticker reading: “Xacobeo Complex. Don’t forget to return it. Thank you.” When preparing the table he put as a tablecloth a paper containing all the information (including map) of the next day’s stage between Triacastela and Sarria. This was a pilgrim-oriented restaurant.
I asked for Galician broth and stewed tongue. I was taking the broth when I heard the dry blow of a volcanodose bottle on my back on the table and then the liquid pouring to the ground like a waterfall. I got the smell of wine.
"Oh my god!" said someone behind me, in a hurry. "Oh my god!" "Oh my God, I repeated to a low volume, saying to myself. They were the unmistakable voice and accent of an Asian, perhaps a Korean." My missake, oh my god!
That "my mistake", my mistake, meaning "my fault", was what made me feel very sorry for him, because in addition, it was most likely that a moment earlier I was enjoying the happiness of a rich dinner cheered by wine, and now I had ruined everything.
I could have turned to offer him my help, to show him at least my understanding, but I didn’t. I followed the scene with my back to it, without turning around once. The Asian remained in place, waiting for the waiter’s arrival as a child waits for the adult’s after committing a frenzy.
But the waiter was not coming because he was serving other tables. A couple of parishioners who had dinner in front of me realized the disaster and, pointing to my neighbor, said to the waiter:
"Paco, get close to that one over there, it looks like he's messed you up.
Paco made a mess of it. Moments later came a woman with a bucket and a mop and Paco himself from behind, with a new bottle of wine.
"No, no, no, no," said the Korean. "My missake, my missake," he repeated.
He didn't want the wine to be replenished. He said he was finished, asked for the bill and left. He must have passed before me, but I didn't look at him.
At the end of the day I asked for a macedonia of fruits that served me in a dish shaped like scallop. With the first spoon I felt a twitch of guts. I didn’t want to give it any importance, it would pass. But the sharp stomach pain persisted and I couldn’t even move. I got scared because I might have to ask for help and I didn’t know anyone there. After a few endless minutes, finally, little by little, I went back. I got up to pay leaving the macedonia intact on the table. I got to the hostel a little dizzy, but as soon as I went through the bathroom everything went back to normal and forgot what happened.



The Xacobeo Complexo, in Triacastela, is a pilgrim-oriented place: they leave you an external battery to recharge your mobile while dining, they put you on tablecloth a paper with all the information for the next day stage, and the flirty detail of the dishes in the form of scallops. And they treat you well, although the pilgrims, in principle, we are only passing customers.
25. Triacastela — Sarria (17.8 km)
I left the hostel in Triacastela and went to the Xacobeo Complex for breakfast. There I met David, an alicantino of about my age who I was recently coinciding with in the public hostels, although we had never spoken before. He invited me to accompany him on the table, along with the coffee he was nibbled a toast with tomato and oil.
"Hey, you didn't happen to see a pretty old Japanese who's all burdened with two sticks," he asked.
- One with a knob, he's running?
- Yes, that one.
"He passed me down the mountain to Ponferrada, but I only saw him at that stage, why?
- I'm looking for him to give me back my cane.
He explained to me what had happened to him. That man arrived at four o’clock in the afternoon in the room of the Ponferrada hostel where David had settled. He seemed shattered. Without presenting himself to anyone or taking a shower, he went straight into bed.
"And at night, at four o'clock in the morning, the alarm rings, nano, waking us all up. The guy gets up, he prepares in the dark and he leaves. And when later I go to get my canes, I find myself missing one. I ask the others and it turns out that the one left without owner is a black one, which looks like mine but sure is the one of the Japanese, which of course I would be sure that he got confused and took mine.
David appropriated it and now he went with the disjointed sticks, looking for the Japanese to recover his. I remembered the face of concentration that that man wore on his descent down the dangerous mountain path. This precisely must be the problem of going to the limit in a challenge like this: along with the physical effort, the concentration required not to hit it left you exhausted, without energies to be attentive to the rest of things.
At the exit of Triacastela one could follow through the valley of San Xil or through the monastery of Samos. The guide said that both routes were beautiful, but by Samos it was 7.2 kilometers longer and, with my blisters, I did not walk for many joys, so I twisted to the right by San Xil and David, in better physical form than I did although he also came from afar (he had started in Roncesvalles), he went for Samos.
And indeed, the stage went through natural environments where oak forests predominated. In many sections the road was at a lower level with respect to the surrounding lands, were the so-called congostras or corredoiras, very common in Galicia. Several were the factors that apparently had led to erosion and the consequent formation of those roads, but it was nice to think of the contribution made by the walkers' steps over time. When these corridors were downhill, and if they were also meandering, then it seemed that you were descending for a slide, and if it had not been for impediment and blisters, perhaps I would have encouraged myself to raise my arms as a pair of wings to put me to run down and enjoy, and who knows if I broke the chrysma.
Upon arriving at Sarria’s enlargement, I felt like I was entering a Pyrenean town near a ski resort, through the slate roofs of some blocks of flats raised here and there, between pitches. I guess also contributed to that feeling the abundance of hotels and accommodations I was seeing, proof that a lot of people were passing through Sarria, among them the one who started the pilgrimage here to travel at least the last hundred kilometers to Santiago.
On the way I met a tourist office and entered to clarify a matter that I was worried about. I had heard that from Sarria it was necessary to seal the credential at least twice a day, so that in Santiago you could prove that you had done at least this last section on foot and in this way you would be given the Compostela, the diploma that accredited your pilgrimage. People usually collected stamps, had the credential stamped in accommodations, churches and emblematic places, and also in bars and bars. I, however, preferred to keep my "cordeón" (as some called it, by its folds) with a single daily seal, that of the hostel.
The girl from the tourist office told me that, in fact, the double seal was necessary for those who made only the last hundred kilometers, but that it was not clear to her for the case of the pilgrims of long distance. She called to ask and told her that in the event of the doubt, she would seal twice a day, what was the problem? «In any bar they seal it for you», she told me. Yes, already, but my credential appreciated it very much as proof of my long trip and wanted it with stamps significant to me, those of my passing through the hostels where I had spent the night, and not with those of any bar in which I would have taken a coke.
Without clarifying it I arrived at the hostel of Sarria, belonging to the Xunta, like all the public hostels in Galicia. I was located in a house in the old town of the city. At the reception I found a lady who was wearing glasses leaning on the tip of the nose, with laces hanging on both sides, waiting sitting inside a glassed doorman’s doorman’s door. There seemed to be not much movement of pilgrims. I approached the window and gave her the ID card and the credential. I noticed some photos that I had on the table, I imagined that they would contain the portraits of her children. She displayed my credential anywhere and, spreading the seal ink, suddenly, I realized that she was preparing to stamp it mechanically in the first box that she saw free.
"NOOOOO!" I shouted.
Too late, the only thing I managed to achieve was to lessen the force with which the seal was imposed. Evil was already done: I had broken the linearity that I had followed scrupulously so far, every seal of the day contiguous to that of the previous one. I could not believe it. Did not this woman know that for a pilgrim there was nothing more sacred than her credential?
I told him to put it back on, this time pointing out the right place. Regarding the blur, maybe I could fix it with a eraser. When the registration process was finished, I asked him about the need for double sealing from Sarria for someone like me, with a credential with as many stamps as those he wore.
"I don't know," he told me, as if I wasn't with her.
"But don't you think coming from afar is not necessary?"
- No idea.
"Wouldn't you be interested to know, in case someone else asks?" I would have asked him with pleasure. But I didn't dare. He stared at me unexpressively above his glasses, as if looking at an object. He didn't even seem to show me where the rooms were.
"And can you tell me, please, where are the rooms?
"The stairs up," he said undisturbedly.
I had never visited Sarria before, and yet it was as if I were a resident of there all my life. When I went out to the balcony of the hostel to lay clothes, right at that moment the Belgian girl and her mother were passing by the street, and we were greeted by voices they told me that they were staying in a nearby hostel. When later I went to go around the old town, empty at that time, I suddenly heard that they were yelling at me and calling me by my name. I looked up and I found the filipines of La Faba, who greeted me with their hand looking out at the window of their hostel. Later I went to the drugstore to buy shampoo, which was finished, and there was the Italian who in San Martín prepared us the magnificent salad. In the supermarket where I bought a precooked for dinner, there were pilgrims who were greeted by the halls. All this had their uncomfortable part, since it was like being in my village, continually waiting to greet everyone. But on the other hand I found the comforting feeling of being part of a tribe.
When I went back to the hostel, I met Isidro and David. We were no longer as unconditional as the public, although they too were beginning to get mad at these from the Xunta. There was no kitchen, only microwave, but they managed well by giving the serrano ham, chorizo and wine. That night, in the dining room, I had dinner accompanied by them and the anecdotes they told.
Isidro, the Murcian already in years who was pissed off in Foncebadón because everything was in English and we were in Spain, was a good snorer, but he said that he was not sleeping well in the shelters either. He told that the other day the sea stayed at ease asleep in O Cebreiro's, until something woke him up.
"And then I open my eyes and go and meet the screen of a mobile phone that was giving me its light all over my face.
"Yes, yes," said David, "I was there, he was a Korean who couldn't sleep for the snoring and started to look for the snoring man with his mobile through the bunk beds.
Isidro, despite opening his eyes, remained half asleep and believed that someone was showing him the screen to read something on it, but he didn't understand what it said because Chinese letters looked like those. Until he woke up at all, he saw the Chinese on top of him and realized what was going on.
"Go on, get the hell out of here and put on plugs," he said, "don't fuck with me.



Between Triacastela and Sarria there are sections on which the road is at a lower level compared to the surrounding grounds. They are common in Galicia and are called congostras or corredoiras. It is nice to think that they were formed by erosion with the steps of the walkers over time. When they are downhill and the road meanders, it seems that you go down a slide.

26. Sarria — Portomarin (22.2 km)
I left the hostel and immediately entered for breakfast in any of the establishments on foot of Camino, in the old town of Sarria. I asked for coffee with milk and toast of Galician bread and sat down. Shortly afterwards, a blonde pilgrim with her hair gathered on a ponytail approached me and spoke to me, but so low that I did not understand the first one. That if I could get there, that the other tables were busy.
- Yes, of course.
She was having milk-free tea and grabbing the cup with both hands, as if to warm them up. I didn’t feel like having a conversation with anyone at that early hour, but she seemed polite. She told me she was Swedish and asked me something, but again I didn’t hear her well because of the noise at the bar.
"Huh?" I shouted loudly, to make him understand, annoyed that he did not dare speak to me a little louder.
That from where he was doing the Way, he hurried to repeat, but without raising the tone this time either. If I understood him it was because I sharpened my ear and focused on his expression, which was delicate. He had a white complexion like porcelain and gave me the feeling that he could break if he forced his fine voice. I had doubtless disturbed her with my abrupt way of addressing her, her shy eyes hardly dared to look at me. I thought that it was not either that I had to be a lynx to guess what I was asking, for they were the typical questions that were asked among pilgrims.
"From my house," I said, explaining where that was and softening the deal as much as I could. I saw myself reflected in it, I felt guilty.
- From Saint Jean.
I found it surprising that that fragile being was making the whole French Way. I took it for granted that he had been walking for at least a month, like me.
"No, I've been here for 13 days," he said.
It was half the time that I was wearing, and that meant that I was doing stages of forty or more kilometers. That didn’t fit me. Then he got up from the chair and went up to the bar to pay for his tea to leave. I saw that he had huge legs, wrapped in black meshes, his thighs were like those of a velocirraptor, of a disproportionate size with respect to his body. Picking up his things moved nervous, as if he couldn’t control the impulse of his motor, like a restless horse about to go on the trot. When I saw him leaving I thought of the uneven development that we could have people in different aspects of ours. That there were things that could perhaps be trained based on effort and strength, to make muscle and run in life, although the confidence needed to travel well, that was no longer molded in the same way.
It was clear that more people were circulating on the road, there was more atmosphere. Near the pillar that indicated the last hundred kilometers to Santiago, I met again Kepa, the one from Bilbao. At a certain distance I heard him come from behind with his loud voice, I kept talking a lot and on this occasion I shared his talk with some young men who went in a gang, one of whom wore the shirt in reddish stripes of the Athletic of Bilbao. Upon coming forward, Kepa addressed me all nice, he looked happy and rejuvenated, he wore a handkerchief knotted in his head to pirate mode.
"Aupa, how's it going?" he asked in Basque.
He looked at me without believing it. I think I pityed him a little by seeing me alone.
"Do you want to come with us?" he proposed. "We are having a great time.
"No, thank you, I prefer to go at my own pace," I replied.
I was glad you found your people.
A little later, as I walked through an oak forest, I began to wrap a slight sound of gaita, a music that came from far away and to which I initially did not pay too much attention. But as it did not stop and it went up in volume, it became evident to me and I gave him a thought: I assumed that I was approaching some establishment with folk music to the full to attract customers. In the end, it turned out that it was an authentic gaitero (with his typical clothes) who was playing the gaita in the middle of the forest in exchange for a donation, had not fallen into that possibility.
I reached the landmark of the last hundred kilometers. I was completely painted, there was no other inscription. Whoever left his mark there knew of the projection he was going to have around the world, I took a picture of him myself.
The blisters started bothering me towards the end of the stage, it didn’t seem to me that the dressings were working at all, it went very well. I still reached a group of Koreans where I went with the couple who had been waving intermittently nothing less than from the Hornillos hostel in Burgos. I had met them on that occasion when I had dinner with Toni in the dining room full of Asians among those who were Emika and Shan Lee (these had long since lost sight of them). The man was the one with the rice ball with seaweed, which wrapped in transparent cooking film for breakfast the following day.
Since then we had greeted each other, although I had hardly spoken to him and did not know his name. His English was very bad, but that did not prevent him from being a nice guy who was always in a good mood (I had seen him with good jars of beer and emptying bottles of red wine, everything has to be said). And I had to see how he was going, especially when I had not seen him for days and was beginning to forget him. A couple of stages before, on a terrace of Triacastela, he saw me from afar and shouted at me as he stood up from the chair and held his pitcher high towards me.
That Korean was the monda. I checked it once again when I accompanied him along with his wife and the rest of his group in the final stretch of the stage. The descent to the bridge that crossed the reservoir of the Miño River could be done by two different paths: one was easy but boring; the other was beautiful but demanding. We were all clear where to go. When the man saw that my choice coincided with his, he began to laugh with laughter when he saw that they were not the only ones that were already for little nonsense at those heights of the Camino.
And as we crossed the bridge, when we met the steep stairs that Portomarin welcomed the pilgrims up, then he began to pee from laughter and, raising his arms, he turned his back on them and asked for a photo to be taken so that there would be a record of the joke they were playing on us.
The stairs were there to ascend to a fully reconstructed village on the hillside, since their original location, on the riverside, had been flooded by the waters of the reservoir inaugurated by Francisco Franco in sixty-three. And the stones with which they had built them came from the disappeared medieval bridge that in its day allowed pilgrims to cross the Miño and enter the original Portomarin. So, seen thus, it made some sense to make us climb all those steps, to continue with the tradition.
The Koreans went to a hostel where they could prepare the food and I went to the audience of the Xunta, for following my custom. Portomarin’s urbanism had some artificiose for having been raised the whole town at the same time and with the same pattern. Therefore, among the identical and semi-new houses, stood out the robust Romanesque church that had been moved there, stone by stone. Nearby, on Camilo José Cela street, was the hostel, a very apparent construction with a monolith shaped Pelegrin in front and a plaque in reception recalling its inauguration in 93 by Manuel Fraga Iribarne.
Inside, the same tonic of the last days: there were washers but not a few simple plastic basins in which to soak the clothes so that the hand washing soap did its effect; the clotheslines were insufficient, the ropes hanging in the courtyard were each of his father and his mother, it was noticed that they had been put there by the pilgrims by way; there were plugs but not a single extension with multiple take so that we could all recharge the mobile calmly without hitting us for them. Those details (the lack of detail) irritated me; I decided not to wash more than the basics and I was outraged to the street to take something in a bar and take advantage to recharge the mobile in the meantime.
At night, my intention was to dine what I had bought in the super accompanied by Isidro and David and his anecdotes, just as I had done so at ease in Sarria the previous day. When I arrived with my bag, in the dining room of the hostel there were more people sharing table with them. They were all Spaniards and they had just started the Camino de Santiago to travel the minimum of the last one hundred kilometers. By the lively talk and the jokes they were bringing, I immediately understood that they had spent the afternoon together. The new were two middle-aged men and two other slightly older, and they came from different Spanish regions.
I had dinner with them and they offered me the wine they were sharing. But I did not open my mouth (not to drink or to speak) because the laughter was going up in tone and that became a “to see who says it fatter”. They were talking about the massage service they offered pilgrims at a modest price somewhere in Portomarin and to whom David, with muscle aches, had been encouraged to go that afternoon.
"And has there been "happy ending" or not?" asked one laughing.
"Well, I wouldn't say no to you, nano, that after so many days, you miss that massage more than the other one.
- But there was then?
"No, I've told you before that it was a man who gave it...
"And what does that have to do with it?" jumped another who was eating pre-cooked oriental noodles and pulled out his tongue to relax his lips obscenely, while putting the cardboard glass in front of him with the mark of the product: Yatekomo.
A burst of laughter.
"Fuck, with the number of Chinese around here," a third pitched, glaring at Imelda and Gilda, who had just passed without understanding what was all the fuss about.
The moment the Filipinos left the dining room, they turned and hunted me laughing shamelessly along with the group of Spaniards. After that I no longer dared to address them.



This Korean (although looking like a Japanese from World War II) is the monda, he is always laughing. He laughs even at the stairs that as a welcome you have to climb up to enter Portomarin, end of stage.
27. Portomarin — Palas de Rei (24.8 km)
The road was getting more and more busy, sometimes even crowds of large groups and associations were formed whose members all went with the same distinctive T-shirt or handkerchief tied around their necks. Consequently, they greeted less, they no longer heard so much the “good Camino!”, not only because it would have been cumbersome to repeat it as a parrot at every step, but because it seemed to no longer have meaning in the more normal environment in which that was becoming.
It was more than mid-morning when I noticed a pilgrim who had left the way to sit on the grass in a place with views. As I passed his height I saw that the girl was reading a book. Although I turned my back on her I recognized Paula, the young German who had coincided with her two days earlier at the hostel in Triacastela. I called her to say hello and she turned.
"How well you are," I said. "It's the first time I've seen something like this on my trip.
I found unusual that scene in which a pilgrim takes his time on the edge of the road to read quietly while enjoying the landscape.
"I'm waiting for all the people to pass," he replied.
Paula had already told me that she never planned. Her end of the stage marked her desire to stop and end the day. She reached where she arrived and then looked for a hostel, and if there was no place to look for another one without caring to walk more until she found a free square where she played.
In Triacastela, when presenting us in the room, he said that he was from Kassel: “Ah, yes, where he documents it,” I said to impress her. “Do you know him?” he asked me surprised. No, I had only read a novel (Kassel does not invite logic, by Enrique Vila-Matas) about this contemporary art event that was being held in his city.
It was clear that she was a girl who was going to her air. That afternoon, as the young pilgrims gathered in the camp in front of the hostel around a guitar, she was picking up small, hard apples like stones from wild apple trees that were there. I was sitting on a bench, focused on my mobile phone, when she came to offer me some. “They’re good,” she exclaimed as she sat next to me to eat them.
I was running out of battery and in that hostel on the Xunta it was a problem because the plugs didn’t work. Paula wasn’t affected by that because she was without a mobile phone, she had left it off in Germany. “And the photos? Don’t you take pictures?” I asked without just believing it. “No, I don’t take pictures.” She called her family every now and then to tell them she was fine, and that was enough.
The next morning, while the others were picking up our things to leave early, Paula was still in her sack. Shortly after, before leaving the room, I looked to her bed and saw that she was awake: without going out of the sleeping bag, leaning on the bunk, I had some cereals with milk in an aluminum box. I wished her a good way. “Do you know where I can find deserts in Spain?” she asked me then. I said to her that I did not know well, but that apart from those of the plateau, in the south sure that I would find them. “That’s what I think I’ll do, when I get to Santiago I’m going down to Seville along the Via de la Plata,” she said. “But won’t that be complicated, going in the opposite direction, looking for arrows looking back, interpreting them backwards?” She seemed to consider it. “No, what’s it going to be,” she said after an instant, smiling, “Why would it be so?”.
Now, two days later, I found her again, this time reading a book on the edge of the road in that place with views. I didn’t want to bother her and said goodbye to her for the second (and last) time. And just a few meters later, I realized that I had just missed the opportunity to take a picture of her. I could have taken her, since I was on my back and I wouldn’t have bothered her, which I also didn’t do. I would have come very well for the blog, to accompany her story. I regretted it a lot, so much, that it came to my mind to go back over my steps to portray her, but I noticed that something very strong prevented me from doing it. It wasn’t just the blisters (which were already waging war on me again), the weight of the backpack, or the having to walk the Way to the contrary, even if it was only in a small stretch. No, it was something more determining that was related to the unique occasion that one presented to you at a certain time unexpectedly and disapproved her for not being attentive.
I was becoming more complicated because of the blisters that, if I was disturbed like in the last two days, I was martyred as much or more than when I arrived in Triacastela, three stages ago. The dressings of the pharmacy were not doing their job because under them, on the soles of the feet, I noticed to anger the gallbladders. I was overwhelmed, not attending to anything but the distress that was causing me to get away with it. I wondered if I could profit from it, extract some teaching related to suffering, I don't know, what I was experiencing sounded like penance and maybe I could attend to the pain I felt, accompany it and accept it to see that despite the torture I was able to move forward, things like that.
Nonsense, that was not an induced psychological discomfort, but an ordeal in every rule that served nothing but to get away from everything and everyone, starting from myself. I didn’t know or care where I was going. I was only an entity in the service of that torture, I had no resources left for anything else and all I wanted was to get to the hostel and finish everything. I only recovered when I stopped in the bars and then understood that, at the most, that cross served me to enjoy more of those truces in which I accompanied me with coffees with milk, tortilla skewers and canes that knew me to blessed glory. I understood that the time had come to rest a whole day because it seemed to me that it would be impossible to follow the next one.
I finally got to Palas de Rei and went as always to the public hostel, located in the center of the village. I had the same deficiencies as the previous ones, with the addition that in this facility were even older, it was not even nice. I didn’t care. After shaving, showering, giving me (as I could) cream on my feet, washing clothes and laying it, I sat down to rest outside, on a bench next to the entrance door to the hostel.
I took the feet off the sandals to give them the air. I saw them in a mess because the dressings were half falling on me and that gave them a horrible look. The adhesive strips were hooked on my socks and when I took these off at every stop that day, I had ended up taking them off partially from the skin. The shower water had definitely left them without their adherent, total power, which seemed to have drags hanging from my feet. And to top it the dressings were of a flesh cream color, so it was not surprising the scare that a pilgrim took when passing by my side looked at my feet and thought that my flesh was falling off my chest, like a leper or a pilgrim with feet gangrenated by the fire of St. Anthony.
I finished taking them all away, the dressings, and then I went to the nearest pharmacy to the hostel. Even on a walk, it hurt me a lot when I stepped on them, definitely the next day I would have to find some hostel where I could stay calmly during the day. At the pharmacy they recommended me to drain the blisters and to rest. According to their judgment, by the place where I had them, it had been a mistake not to do it before I covered them with the dressings. I bought some hypodermic needles and then went through a supermarket to buy something light to eat. When I returned to the hostel I met David, Isidro and the gang of the previous day at the entrance, making plans to go buy and dine together.
- What, you're not up to us?
"No, I'm sick of it," I told them.
I went to my bunk to make myself the priests. Then I practically didn’t move from there because I was happy to rest my feet, without supporting them they didn’t hurt. I studied on my mobile phone the accommodation options for the next day, in Palas de Rei they were not scarce. I wanted to pay a tribute to myself and, to imagine a king’s body, I looked for a hotel called “Hotel Palas”, but it didn’t seem to exist any with that precise name (there was, yes, a “Pensión Palas”, but it wasn’t the same). Then I dedicated a lot of time to the blog because that day, having not been able to be very attentive, had very little real material to share and I had to invent some history.
In the evening I got carried away by a very pleasant sleepy candle. At one point, I was awakened by the laughter of the jolgorio brought by those of the gang who were having dinner together in the dining room of the hostel. I identified Isidro, who started to sing a couple of coplas with a lot of feeling and a very powerful tone of voice, like that of an Antonio Molina. When I finished the piece, they heard olés and many applauses and cheers (and laughs, poor Isidro) on the party that the others brought. I was glad to not be with them, I preferred to rest in my bunk, quiet and alone, but connected by means of the chronicle that I had just left written.
28. Palas de Rei — Arzúa (28.5 km)
I slept very well and in the morning waited for the people to leave and the bedroom to be clear before I got up and posed my day. As I got off the bunk and took the first steps, I checked that my blisters did not hurt. My feet looked better than the day before. I put on my slippers and said to myself: what am I going to do today the whole holy day in this town? I felt encouraged to see how far I could go. Maybe Melide would reach, halfway through; in this way, maybe I could complete in four simple stages, instead of the three officers, what was left until Santiago.
I began to walk with all the calmness, consciousness, and then I checked that it was not bad. And as the morning progressed, but especially as I approached the end of the short stage to Melide that I had set out (fourteen kilometers), I realized that I could go further and, who knows, maybe even end up normal in Arzua.
When I arrived at Melide I smelled an octopus when I passed by a few bass. There was a half-open ventanuco and I looked up. Inside I saw a man with a bunch of octopus that was cutting off his head with a knife. A few steps away there was the famous Ezequiel pulpery. It was only 11 a.m. and, for how big the place is, there were very few people. At one of the bullfighting tables, Isidro and David were finishing a portion of octopus that they had shared. As they did not make me a very hot reception I sat next to them but not with them, since I left a gap free of distance. They continued to ignore me very little and, remembering how well I had spent it in their company and that of their anecdotes did so only a couple of days, I felt hurt. Then they got up to pay and left without remembering to say goodbye. At the end, I said to myself, it was I who had gone away in the first place.
I asked for Galician broth and a serving of octopus. To drink, a glass of ribeiro. Without explaining anything to me, the waiter planted a whole bottle of wine and a rustic cup without handles (and I asked for «copa» of ribeiro). I assumed that serving the whole bottle was the norm of the house, that they did not walk with little girls, so I did not protest. I said that since I would have to pay for it anyway, I was going to drink with foundation. And so I did, the broth and octopus I thoroughly watered them. The wine ended up getting sentimental and I remembered Toni. I sent him a message:
Hi Toni, I'm at Ezequiel pulpery in Melide, just as you recommended me. I'm on my way to Arzua, but I've stopped to pay tribute to myself: broth, octopus and ribeiro. I've had my stories these days, things got complicated with blisters (the one that went down to Ponferrada from Cruz de Ferro killed me). But here I am, about to get to Santiago. I hope you're going down the Primitive well, I guess you'll come to this very place where I am now. Thank you very much for your recommendations and teachings, you see that I followed them to the letter.
When I finished my lunch and went to pay, I learned that, from the bottle of ribeiro, you were charged only the approximate amount that you had drunk. Anyway, nothing happened, I felt happy. Before leaving the place I received Toni’s reply in the form of a voice message that I had recorded as I walked:
Nothing, I'm glad you're having a good time. I thank you for holding me up. And what else? The feet and so on, remember that you're Basque, you don't have any left, you already have it, that is, with two talking balls, and what's left and nothing is the same thing. And here nothing, the Savior for me was harder than this, he's also a going up and down. Otherwise, it's all right. Also tire of me, don't believe, eh? On the climbs I look like a locomotive blowing. And my feet and that nothing, in my line, I'm going well. Okay? Well, I repeat, I'm happy a lot. Take care a lot, a hug.
As I left the pulpy it was raining. It was the first time that it rained on me during the trip. I had no choice but to release the cape that I had bought expressly for the Camino. I had some repairs to put it on, because with the backpack bulging from behind it would look like a humpback. But immediately I saw reports of pilgrims lying in ponchos, so I retreated to a corner and I also threw over the raincoat. When soon after we left the town of Melide to get us into a forest of eucalyptus, it seemed to me that it was part of a column of porters.
It wasn’t raining very hard, but my shoes were getting wet and that could also be cause for concern, since my shoes were totally permeable. When I was preparing the trip I had given him a lot of thought to this question, because, as in the Formula 1 races, before the start it was important to choose between rain or dry tires, since by weight I couldn’t carry the two pairs. In anticipation of the heats of the plateau and so that my feet weren’t sewn, I decided for the dry ones, some light and breathable summer shoes. But now I found the problem of water, because walking with wet feet was terrible because of the greater risk of friction. Just when it seemed that my blisters were finally giving me a breath.
However, the rain became drizzle and finally stopped falling water. I kept moving slowly, with the glasses of my glasses covered with drips that did not allow me to see well, but happy because that was going. The blisters were still there and the discomfort ended up appearing, but it was not much less the torment of the previous day. Besides, in bad, I was almost in Ribadiso de Baixo, a town that had a magnificent hostel of the Xunta on the edge of a river and that was three kilometers from the last climb with end in Arzúa.
I was little short of completing the official stage, which was of the long ones (almost thirty kilometers), and wondered if my feet would finally be healing. I could not know. But it seemed clear that this was a matter of going day by day. Or even moment by moment, because, feeling victorious as I went down a rather steep path towards Ribadiso de Baixo, I stepped badly on a tree roots that stood out from the earth and about to twist my ankle and end up on the ground. A great escape. When I got back from the scare, I remembered what Toni had told me about what it was like to get to these final heights of the Way: being so close, there was no God to stop a pilgrim; if necessary, people were able to make the last kilometers crawling down the ground with such a view of getting to Santiago.
The only thing I visited in Arzúa was its main street, very long, through which it entered the town and where the shops and the hotels for the pilgrims were. It did not seem to me that it was a town with a lot of charm, although there was, yes, a great animation of people. Just as in Melide the French Way received the Primitive (by which Toni was coming down from Oviedo), in Arzúa the Camino del Norte (the one that travels much of the Cantabrian coast from Irun), and I suppose that, with the contribution of these two tributaries, the river of the Camino became here a great river near its sea in Santiago.
The hostel of the Xunta was located in a house in the center. It was uncomfortable and followed the same pattern as the previous ones as to the few facilities it offered. In the services, before getting into the shower, I was shaving in front of the mirror when one of the members of the group of Spaniards who had formed in the last two hostels, one that was middle-aged and whose name I never stayed.
"With razors and everything, eh?" he said with a mockington as he headed towards one of the toilet booths.
The truth was that I did not remember seeing other pilgrims with electric razors in what I was traveling, although I had not noticed too much. Many men did not shave and I imagined that the rest would use blades, lighter to carry. Would they have me for a finolis? A loose relamid? Because that guy would tell the others of the group, that was for sure, after all I had shunned them.
Fuck me, I told myself. What I was missing, worried at this point about the trip of such a often stupid comment. There seemed to be no one else in those indoor baths and I thought of the way to return it. I had noticed that fluorescents, besides turning on, all went off from a single switch by the door (things of these old shelters). I turned off the razor and waited. Then I sounded the surge of effort followed by something, plop, falling into the toilet well, and I quickly came out of the services by turning off the lights and leaving the man in the dark at work, while I heard him screaming for someone to turn them back on, I shit in God. I went to my bunk, and I would see if I showered a little later (I didn't do it, the showers were with cortinillas and the moth had to leave it out).
How could I do that? I was not of that style, much less, and now I had complicated the existence by fearing the reaction of that individual (and of the rest of the gang). In the room I changed my clothes and went out to the street, to find some bar where I would take refuge with my mobile phone and my notebook and a beer. Then I went to a super and bought bread, a pre-cooked and yogurt for dinner. Lunch in the pulpery was already far away and I was hungry, so I said that I would eat early so avoiding meeting others. I heated the pre-cooked in the microwave of the hostel and then, when I was in the middle of the dish, David appeared through the dining room loaded with a lot of bread bars. He said that for the night they had organized a joint dinner.
“Why don’t you come, nano?” he said. “We’re going to be many, more people have signed up,” he said. “In addition, Isidro has promised us a new song recital, don’t see what we laughed about yesterday.
He seemed like a good guy, David, that “nano” (pronounced nanu) with whom he was addressing me made me feel accepted. He was appearing more people, loaded with plastic bags with snacks and bottles. They started to prepare dinner and I, who was alert and uncomfortable, prepared to leave. I was sorry to fail him, perhaps I took it as a lack of consideration or education on my part. Or maybe he didn’t notice. I tried at least to say goodbye when I was leaving the dining room, but I was entangled in his conversations and laughter with others.
“What’s left and what’s left is the same,” Toni said to me that morning in his voice message. And in the pain, time plays in my favor, I thought. And the one I had left I wanted to employ it in something significant for me, so I went to the bunk to rest and write for the blog.
In the bedroom I met the individual who had done the work in the afternoon in the bathroom. Nothing happened. I guess he would be ashamed to tell it and the group would laugh at what had happened to him. Moreover, he even had a nice gesture with me when he finished recharging his mobile phone and gave me the plug.



Suddenly, the word “vahos” came to my mind. Those my mother was preparing me as a child for colds and sinusitis. My senses have processed this aroma and only after I understood it: it smelled like vahos because the forest I entered was eucalyptus and, after so many days of sunshine, it was finally raining.
29. Arzúa — O Pedrouzo (19.3 km)
There were only two stages left, and both of them were just twenty kilometers away. That was already done. I left the hostel and went straight into the bar across the street. I asked for coffee with milk with toast of Galician bread. Once I had breakfast, with the light of day, I started. After the rain of the previous day, I returned to make good weather, the sky was clear. The oak and eucalyptus forests alternated with small villages surrounded by cows, grasses and corn crops. That flowed, with the number of people walking, I felt as if I was swimming as part of a fish bank downstream. There were even parents with children, and that was a novelty, because it was the first time I saw children (acronym that gave me to form when I saw them, to have a little fun). The truth is that it was Sunday and they practiced a little hiking in family.
Near O Pedrouzo, I met a middle-aged man, with a hippy-style ponytail and loose clothing, who was waiting for the pilgrims to pass by the stall he had set up in a park pavilion. I passed by looking through the corner of my eye, as I always do in these cases, but a few meters later I stopped, reconsidering: it was a book that I offered.
The guy was teaching his book to a pilgrim at the time, so I was able to take a quick look. On a small table covered by a lilac tablecloth, he had stacked some volumes together with a seal for credentials, a caramel dish and another for donation. The whole was like an altarpiece, although the incense was missing. I took a copy. It was quite tocho, it weighed. Shared solitude. What a good title for a book. The cover showed the image of a sunset on the sea and the following quote: «The awakening of consciousness is inevitable if you risk the void of uncertainty». It was signed by a certain Walter.
"Did you write it?" I asked.
It was supposed, although in the flap of the book, as an author, the photo of a labrador dog named Flan (it was the same color as a flan) appeared.
"We wrote it between Flan and me, we're both the authors. I'm Walter, how about that," he said, giving me his hand and then bowing down to caress Flan, who had approached us in the meantime.
Walter was an Argentine and had written the book while he was doing the Camino de Santiago a few years ago. Without haste: in the morning he walked and in the afternoon he wrote. Now he lived on the Camino, literally, since he slept in his van, parked right there, next to the pavilion. He was delighted with the public’s response to his work, he had reprinted it for the fifth time and even had an English version. I congratulated him. Truly, it seemed to me that it was very worthwhile to write a book. Now, I told him that in my backpack he was forbidden to enter a gram more of weight.
"But a book doesn't weigh," he told me.
No, not at all, I thought, and above all this, almost five hundred pages.
- How much is it?
"The will," he replied. "It was evident that I had the answer rehearsed: we are on the Way and here things are priceless, they go by donation.
But I read some phrases between poetics and sapientials, with words like "Love" or "Universo" written with initial capital, that sounded to me to spirituality New Age. I told him that I needed to look at him a little more and he gave me the address of a bookstore in Santiago where I could also find him. Or Pedrouzo was just around the corner, and Santiago, as he says, too; so, as I walked away from his post, I understood that Walter had chosen very well the exact point at which to place his voluminous book.
In O Pedrouzo, undisturbed, I passed in front of the hostel of the Xunta without realizing it, since it was a little hidden behind a building at the entrance itself. The town reminded me of Arzúa, also here was accessed to the urban center by a main street anodina, with blocks of houses on both sides, whose lows were full of bars, restaurants and shops. I gave the impression of finding myself in a tourist place, because a boy stationed on the sidewalk distributed advertising of the restaurant that had on his back, which offered special menus for pilgrims. The offer was wide and I followed a little further. I had left behind the hostel, but I decided to stay there and eat something before returning, settling and sleeping in it my last night in shared room.
In the hostel I took a pleasant surprise. At the reception, instead of a counter or glassed door to wait for standing, there was a table with a pair of chairs so that the pilgrim, when arriving, would sit during the registration procedure, a whole consideration.
"It's cooled, hasn't it?" said the woman in charge as she pointed out my data.
Indeed, it was sunny but a cold autumn wind had risen.
"If you're cold, you tell me and I turn on the heat a little," he added.
That woman's cordiality was leaving me amazed.
"Do you mind if I put you in a bunk upstairs?" he asked. "Everyone asks me for the ones downstairs and they're running out of me, and if I can get someone who really needs it...
The truth is that I was sick of it always touching me upstairs, especially because I had not dared to claim from the previous hieratics who were in charge of changing it to one from below. But now I had the opportunity to do so, that woman was kind and made me feel confident enough to ask her. I could use any of the excuses that other pilgrims, especially the Spaniards, used. Without going any further, moments before I had heard two short-sighted young people go before me who needed to sleep downstairs in order, in case they needed, to have at hand the glasses they kept at night in the backpack.
"Sure, no problem," I said, accepting a bunk from above.
It was never easy for me to claim something, not even when I had it easy. But in that case, grateful for the treatment of that woman, I felt indebted to her and I loved having the opportunity to respond to her facilitating her work. Would she have been in office for a short time?
When I entered the bedroom, I found my beloved gang there, reantiated in the lowlands of the area where I was going to sleep, and I understood that, with a little more time in that position, that hospital woman would most likely become one more manager like the ones I had found myself until then. Or else, in order not to alienate herself, I would abandon her work.
At dusk I went out for a walk around O Pedrouzo. It was Sunday and a cold wind was blowing. Here and there some pilgrims were seen, but in general the streets looked desolate. Lately I did not meet many of those who had gone up to my height during the trip. I knew that some had deserted from the public shelters, but still I did not see them on the street or on the road. Perhaps they had been left behind, or more likely they had gone ahead taking advantage that the last two stages were short. In any case, on that melancholic afternoon, in the inhospitable O Pedrouzo, I missed them and wondered where they would be.
As I had nothing to do, I went to see where I had to continue the next morning. On the outskirts of the village there was a pillar on whose plate it said: «Km 19,308». I thought it was incredible that the trip was about to end after almost a month and about seven hundred kilometers traveled. Arriving at Santiago, the question among the pilgrims was whether it was continuing or not to Finisterre. «You are still going to Finisterre?», those of the group had asked me. They did go, all together. No, for me it was enough. The goal was Santiago, and the Finisterre thing was not to be the prolongation of an experience that ended the next day, with its good part, because finally it was over, and also with its bad part, because unfortunately it was over. But it was important to give it the intensity that it deserved. In the future I could continue doing more Paths, or perhaps the same, again. But it seemed to me that the first Way that was about to end was also, in a certain way, the last.
30. O Pedrouzo — Santiago de Compostela (19.4 km)
I woke up from an agitated dream about one in the morning. I came down from the bunk with great care not to make noise to not wake up to the one below. In the dark, I had to feel so as not to stumble on the backpacks that had been left next to the beds. They heard loud snoring from different people, each with their particular sound and rhythm. As I walked through the heated room in the direction of the services, I felt like I was in a machine room or in the guts of a mechanism that had some sleeping monster.
That morning almost everyone got up very early, many did it at five o’clock to get to Santiago soon. It was not clear to me why I was in such a hurry to show up there, although it was true that, once in Santiago, the pilgrim had to perform not a few rituals. In any case, I decided to take it easy because I wanted to taste the last stage, so, numb, I waited for the bulk of the people to leave to get up.
I left the hostel later than ever, almost at eight o’clock, time limit. I had breakfast in the first cafeteria I met and then I got on the way with the daylight. There was a lot of pilgrims. The landscape was typical of the last days, composed basically of eucalyptus forests. I noticed how my steps automatically followed the yellow arrows and the pillars, it was as if after so many days of training, these signals had been incorporated into a navigation system in my brain, an autonomous mechanism that was in charge of searching for them and taking me away without I taking care of it. Perhaps that’s why I was more receptive than ever to the changes that were taking place in the landscape, to the background noises of a highway, the roar of the planes in the airport that had to be bordered or the rumor of the city getting closer.
My wife had written me a message telling me to say hello when I passed a webcam that Galician television had placed in its facilities, located next to the Camino shortly before Monte do Gozo. When I arrived at the place, I called her to warn and to tell me where I had to look, because nothing warned me of the presence of that camera and I did not see her. When I finally deduced where I was, next to me came pilgrims who saw me waving my hand in the direction of a lamppost.
It was already about noon and I was about to reach Monte do Gozo (there was not a kilometer left), when I decided to delay the pleasure of seeing Santiago handing me over to another pleasure: to enter a bar to eat a pincho of tortilla accompanied by a good cane. I was already celebrating it.
A while later, I arrived at the monument-armatoste located at the top of the hill. I was disappointed to see that from there the city was not seen because of the growth of trees that covered the view. In addition, I missed the sculptures of the two expressive medieval pilgrims pointing out the towers of the cathedral as the end of their long journey, an image that I had recorded in memory since I had seen it in photos. Where were they? I went a little closer by the dry mountain and guessed them in the distance, lonely, about five hundred meters from where I was. I walked towards them along the paths of the park, more and more lonely as I walked away from the Camino. In fact, as I reached the landing where the sculptures were planted, I found myself completely alone and, with my presence, scared some maggots who flew to them. Now, yes, I saw Santiago and the towers of the cathedral at the bottom, and I felt close to the joy of those two enormous bronze figures that accompanied me.
I waited for someone to come because they wanted to take a picture of me. I thought it was incredible that no one came near me, but it was true that drifting here meant walking a few miles away and Santiago was a stone’s throw away. After about a quarter of an hour a couple of pilgrims finally appeared.
On my way down from Monte do Gozo I found myself in the outskirts of Santiago. In the book The immortal road, I had read that the entrance to the city along the French Way was ugly, but I didn’t think so much. There was no red carpet waiting for the pilgrims, no special welcome, and that I liked, it seemed more authentic, as if no one cared about our arrival. I went on the outskirts of the city mixing with passers-by, looking at the metal scallops embedded on the sidewalk that guided my steps. I was accompanied by the excitement of seeing in the traffic panels the indications to access the historic center of Santiago, when I didn’t arrive in the city by car, but on foot, and also, for the first time in my life.
It was almost two o’clock in the afternoon when I reached the old town. Suddenly, a group of people began to applaud me from the other side of the street ("Come on, cheer up!"), they shouted at me. They were the gang, David and Isidro among them, already showered and cleaned. As they had arrived at eleven in the morning, they had given almost everything time and were now waiting to go together to pick up the Compostela.
During those days I had fantasized about getting to Obradoiro square accompanied by the sound of a gaita. In my dream I anticipated the pleasant emotion for having achieved it. I imagined that in the blog I would describe it saying something like: «...and then it seemed to me that all the bad things of the trip —the blisters, the tiredness, the heat, the snoring, the bunks above, the pre-cooked ones and even the hostels of the Xunta— had been worth it for that incomparable moment in which one makes his way into the square of Obradoiro».
And indeed, when I was near, I heard the gaita. But just when I accessed the passageway that gives to the square, the gaitero who plays there in exchange for some coins stopped to take a break. The first thing I saw when I made my entrance in the esplanade was pilgrims lying on the floor over their backpacks looking at the facade of the cathedral. In the middle of the square, I turned around and did the same thing: I unbuttoned the moorings of the backpack, I dropped it and sat on the ground reclining on it. “It’s there,” I said to myself. “It’s over.” I was just resting, looking at the cathedral and the people. I sent a message to my woman informing her of my arrival. I was also looking at those who were walking around for if I found a familiar face, but I didn’t see anyone. It was like they would? It was as if they had vanished after a dream. Some of them took pictures of group, laughing at my arrival. I also saw some tears from emotion and the next goodbyes. I needed me if I took a picture. I didn’t take a picture.
Following the recommendation that Toni gave me in his day, I went to the Minor Seminary hostel, an old seminary of priests converted into a huge hostel for pilgrims, located in a green area not far from the old town. I had the pleasure of staying in a single cell, which for me, after a month of common dormitories, was a luxury despite the monastic austerity of the room, composed only of a bed, a sink and its mirror, and a small table with its chair. I had regained intimacy! Something as simple as having a plug for myself or the freedom to turn off the light when I came in a win at night. Let’s not say not to hear snoring or to reveal myself before the hour.
No one was waiting for me, so I had all the time at my disposal. After shaving, showering and giving me cream on my feet, I no longer washed my clothes nor, therefore, did I tend them. I went back to my cell, threw the key and lay down in bed to nap.
The first thing I did in the afternoon was to go to the Office of Reception of the Pilgrim, located in a street near the square of the Obradoiro, to seal the credential for the last time and give me the Compostela. It was about five o’clock, so I rushed because I knew there would be a lot of people. And in fact, when I arrived I found a long tail that spread through the galleries that surrounded the central garden of the house. The row exceeded the length of the corridors and, as if it were the access to a mass show, there were tape posts to order the ranks of people in a going and coming. I greeted some well-known faces, but I did not speak to anyone. I did not hear the snorches of impatience so characteristic of these situations, it was a calm agglomeration and I would say that even happy.
After almost two hours, the turn finally came to me. On a monitor they were indicating the number of counters (out of a total of seventeen that had opened) to which to turn when a bell was ringing. In front of me a young woman went to number two and, at that moment, the number one was released, so I waited for the imminent call. But it did not happen immediately because the official was looking without dissimulation at the girl who had passed before me. Then the rudder sounded and I gave a resping. Nervous, when I arrived I handed the credential to the employee. I got a sheet to fill it in with my data and answer to the questionnaire. They asked for my profession. What was it? I put “Programmator”, and nothing else I realized that I could not be more true, even if I did not exercise, what else I spent more time in my life?
- What, do we throw Lopetegui out or don't we throw him out?
"How?" I asked, looking up at the paper, confused.
But it wasn't me the man was talking to, but the security guard who suddenly appeared behind my back with boring walks. In any case he didn't answer me (he might not even hear me), so I looked back at the sheet while he kept commenting with the guard on the complicated future before him the still-then coach of Real Madrid.
I marked the “Spiritual” box. I returned the questionnaire to him. The official consulted something on the computer, I assumed it would be the correspondence of my name in Latin. He then wrote it with a black marker and, adding the date, gave me the desired Compostela while congratulating me in a protocol manner. The stamps of my credential did not look at them.
I left the counter telling me “what nice things they are after all, they don’t charge you anything.” But before they left, they made you pass through a position where they sold the official cardboard tubes to carry in the diploma. Two euros. And I paid them, of course, everyone bought them, it wasn’t a question of taking the precious Compostela home anyway among the dirty clothes in the backpack.
It was more than seven o’clock when I fell on a bench in Fonseca Square, next to the cathedral. I called my wife. There was a great animation on the street, the terraces of the restaurants were filling up. I saw a group of Italians pass by and, soon after, another of Germans, they were all pilgrims with whom I had coincided scatteredly during the trip and only now I saw them gather in countries to celebrate it. Definitely, the Way was over. When I finished talking on the phone I realized that I was dying of hunger and thirst, and behind my back there was a pizzeria, just what I needed.
Inside, I was placed on an individual table in front of the open door of the restaurant. I was still discreet enough not to feel as if I had been punished. Neapolitan pizza and cane. While I was dining I saw the people crossing the place. I was already with the coffee when I saw two women who sounded like me off the road. They also recognized me and decided to enter the restaurant. We greeted each other. Their faces were very familiar to me, but I only clearly remembered having advanced them that same day, at our late entrance to Santiago: in the fifties, one of them walked with many difficulties while the other stopped to wait for her.
They sat down, barefooted and asked for a jug of sangria. Shortly after I was finished and, as I went to leave, I hesitated for a moment, but in the end I turned to them to wish them once again "good Way", this time in their lives. They were Canadians and congratulated me on having achieved it too.
"Are you following Finisterre?" one asked.
"No way," I answered.
And then he raised his hand and showing me the palm he said to me:
- We don't either. Hit those five.
I bumped them, first one and then the other. And I said goodbye to them forever as one who says a «see you later», smiling inside and thinking that, without a doubt, this was the best of the Way.



http://www.crtvg.es/crtvg/cameras-web/o-bando-san-marcos



Here I wanted to get there. At the bottom you can see the towers of the cathedral of Santiago (in the image they are only intuited above my head). I share the joy of these two giant bronze pilgrims, these yes, of those of cape and staff. More than any other, this is the photo that I wanted to take.
Santiago de Compostela
At night I was awake until so many in my room. As I was the one who decided at what time the light went out, lying on the bed, I took advantage to take notes and quietly write the texts that accompanied the photos of the day.
The next morning I woke up at eight o’clock feeling rested. I took up my habit of shaving and showering in the morning just as I got up. After a month, this was also a novelty. I got dressed in my walking clothes and went out walking through the long corridors of the old seminar. After the area of individual rooms, I crossed the one of the shared bedrooms and common rooms, with shoemakers full of boots and interior clothes loaded with clothes put to dry. It was like being in a hotel inside a hostel, or the other way around. As I walked through the corridors I crossed with familiar faces to which I greeted, but now I was in a hurry to stop and talk. It was as if I no longer belonged to that world that had been mine until very few hours ago.
I went to the old town for breakfast. I received a message from my wife in which I was attached a screenshot of the Office of Reception of the Pilgrim in which it read: «Yesterday 1034 pilgrims arrived in Santiago». «And one of them was you», she added. In the shop window of a craft shop, I saw earrings with a nice design shaped like scallops. I already had his gift.
At about eleven I approached the cathedral. There were many people, tourists and pilgrims, both from the Camino and from organized trips. I stood in line to go to the main chapel to embrace the figure of the apostle Santiago. I agreed that I fell right in the middle of a group of retired people coming from some Spanish region, had them in front and behind and they were making a big fuss. Not only they, the bustle was general and, from time to time, from the speakers, there was a request for silence, that we were in a temple and there were people praying. Then, for a minute or two, people were holding back, but immediately they forgot and came back. The tail was moving very slowly and we were getting nervous because, in half an hour, I was going to start the pilgrim’s mass. I noticed the lady behind me, who was pushing me with the bag. At the end I had to say it:
- Ma'am, you're pushing me!
"Oh, son," he replied.
I stepped aside to let it pass. But immediately, the retirees who were behind the lady took advantage of the gap left by this to gain ground and get up to my height. Now it was I who had to push them laterally to fit in and not stay out of the queue. I was getting pissed off. I finally decided that the Apostle would be hugged another time and left the line to go down to the crypt, where his tomb is. Fortunately, here we did not have to wait, although the circulation of people was continuous. I looked towards the urn containing the remains, but I was more aware not to keep waiting for those who came next, so I did not hear much. I left there and went to sit in a bank to wait for the Mass to begin.
It turned out to be quite monotonous. Next to me was a German pilgrim of a certain age (with boots, I was sure that she had just arrived in Santiago that morning) who was asleep during the sermon: he would wave at me and notice his weight on my side, until just as I was about to put his head on my shoulder he would shake and, waking up, he would straighten again. I would look at the funny little hands that the figure of Santiago on the altar was flashing from behind him intermittently (they were the hands of the one who was giving him a hug at those moments). I was surprised that they would keep letting people pass in the middle of the liturgy.
He assumed that the Mass would end without more, but at the end of it the priest announced that the botafumeiro was going to start. He didn’t expect it, supposedly they didn’t do it anymore except on specified days or if the corresponding fee was paid, something that the big groups agreed to. The main priest said: “You can sit down.” And then not only did anyone who was standing up sit, but the rest of the people got up from the banks while the mobile phones were getting ready to take the photos. Indeed, it was a whole show.
I stayed the afternoon to do what I had to do before returning home. The next day, at Santiago station, I was going to catch a train (the Intercity La Coruña-Hendaya) that in ten hours, would leave me directly in Zumarraga, a few meters from where I had started everything. What things are, in normal circumstances this long journey by train would have considered it a heaviness; however, now it seemed to me of the most comfortable and fast.
I went to the widening of the city and bought Santiago cakes for the whole family. Santiago was a city with a lot of movement that Tuesday afternoon, in the shopping streets there were no pilgrims and, myself, going shopping and going to take a look at the Follas Novas bookstore, I felt like a little more urban.
At the last minute I returned to the vicinity of the cathedral to visit the Museum of Pilgrimages. I went around the halls that explained the history of the Camino de Santiago, but what he called me the most was a temporary exhibition of photographs. It was entitled “Walkers”, and in it, its author, a photographer named Tino Martínez, showed portraits of current pilgrims. Below each image there was a brief text in which the portrayed person explained his story in a few lines.
In the same sample there was also another series of landscape photos, in black and white. In one of them, between undulating fields, there appeared a dirt road that was bifurcating, and in the background there was a walker who continued on one of the two branches, moving away from the other option that I had left behind. Observing it I remembered that when I left home, until the last moment I hesitated about the exact day on which to leave. I was shuffled several possibilities. In principle, whenever it did not rain, it did not matter a day before or a day later, the decision depended only on me. And at that time, before the photo of the exhibition, I would have been somewhat vertigo when I thought that if I had not left precisely the day on which I did it, I would not have known the same people that I knew or lived the same experiences. A single day before or a single day later, and, for example, I would not have coincided with Toni! The story would have been another. It would have been another way, an alternative one, as it was not to go through the image that I was impossible.
Epilogue
Two weeks after returning from Santiago, after meeting with the comforts of being at home and quickly getting used to them, I began to miss the Camino. After a month of uncomfortable walks and hostels, the return to my reality became hard. Definitely, I too had been impressed with this experience.
The Intercity that brought me back was already in Vitoria, near both Zumarraga, where I was looking to reach to embrace my wife, who was waiting for me at the station. I was abstracted, looking out the window, when suddenly I saw a little boy, about three years old, who from the hand of his mother and from behind the access lathes to the platform, at quite a distance, was saying goodbye to me with his hand. Until I realized that it was not to me that he was going to go, but to his father, who had gone up to the train and accommodated himself to a couple of seats from where I was. The train started and we crossed the new neighborhoods of the periphery of Vitoria, full of blocks of flats for sale. And there I remembered that I still did not work. And along with the pricked one that gave me unexpectedly these thoughts, I was overwhelmed by the concern that I was actually behind them: the question of what I should do in future to occupy a place again, an issue this one that I had left me to leave behind the train.
Although it seemed that with the trip I had done nothing but avoid the problem, at the same time I thought I had achieved something important. To the happiness of the reunion with my wife, my family and my things, joined the illusion of having made myself visible to my surroundings. They had followed with interest my blog, in which I thought I had shown myself. There was proof that, despite everything, it could work, because from what I had shared it could be deduced that I was alive and the only thing I was looking for was a path that allowed me to follow. But I needed confidence.
During those first days I felt the pleasure of being a protagonist. My wife kept telling details of the things that had happened to me. One of my brothers told me that every day, after beding his children, I spent a few minutes on the blog, it was like following a novel, a few photos accompanied by brief texts that, with the short time that I had, I read with pleasure. My other brother told me that he had liked to know inside the Camino de Santiago and that he had felt like doing it, if not because the work prevented him. My father, at our meeting on the weekend, asked me questions that I answered enchanted and recalled the anecdotes with which he had laughed the most.
But after this injection of self-esteem, in a few days things went back to where before. Still on some other occasion we talked about my wanderings, but then nothing, as it is natural life continued and I, finding nothing more to offer, returned to my usual mutism. And with my silence returned the painful feeling of failing again. I was even ashamed of everything I had told on the blog, maybe they were nothing but nonsense at the end of the day. That's when I started to miss the Way.
I had to write this book. Perhaps I could prolong the communication. I would lie if I said that during the trip I had not thought of writing it and that the material that was accumulating in the blog, as well as the notes in my notebook, were not ultimately directed to this project. But now it was clear that I had to launch and put myself to it. I had no other one left. In the same way that when I started the Path the goal was to get to Santiago, now I was going to start a new uncertain adventure that would take me several months with an equally clear objective: to write a book about my experiences and also to talk about me.
I had already tried to carry out other writing projects before and had always crashed. I had found it too hard, from a job and an excessive uncertainty for the security I had in myself. But now I had a guide or basis consisting of the material I had collected, something like the help provided by the Way with its signage and its infrastructure so that the inexperienced could travel it.
So I set out with a similar approach to the one I had taken during the pilgrimage. I got up early and after breakfast I would go in front of the computer to go through the stage on which I had proposed to write that day. I used the morning on it, until I got to the hostel that meant lunch time. Then I would go to the mountain to walk for a while, and in the afternoon, shave, shower, take care of practical issues and read, and at night I would go to bed early. And so every day, with a routine just like if I was doing the Camino de Santiago. Of course I was chasing insecurity, inside my head the critical voice would say to me: «Who did you think you were pretending to write a book? You better leave it and put yourself to do what is right for you». Sometimes that same voice would rebel and pass me to the physical ground, meduring my strength and forcing me to slow down the march: as if I had inflamed my foot. Other times the lack of confidence would lie down directly on the couch: as if I could not walk through the pain of a few blisters. But when I recovered, I was, and forced me to slow the way: as if I was to slow down, as if I was to slow down the way: as if I was to slow down, as if I was always I was to slow down: as if I was to slow down the way: as if I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was getting back: as if I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was getting away, I was I was getting away, I was getting away, as if I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I was getting away I was I was I was I was I was I was getting away I was I was getting away I was I was I was I was I was I was I was I
So when I wrote about the journey and in this way, I also returned to that intense experience that was for me the Way of Santiago. And now that I have finished it I keep looking for other ways to take it back.








This edition of
From Camino Tu Santiago.
A journey on foot
was printed by Amazon.

